FONTE: https://archive.org/stream/Bazin_Andre_What_Is_Cinema_Volume_2/Bazin_Andre_What_Is_Cinema_Volume_2_djvu.txt
URL: https://archive.org/stream/Bazin_Andre_What_Is_Cinema_Volume_2/Bazin_Andre_What_Is_Cinema_Volume_2_djvu.txt

CIIHEil^?
es^fff selected and translated by HUGH GRAY
VOiUilE II
!
i
.1'
I
WHAT IS CINEMA?
VOLUME II
l/HAT IS CINEMA?
VOL II
by ANDRE BAZIN
essays selected and translated
by HUGH GRAY
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
Berkeley Los Angeles LondoQ
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS, LTD,
London, England
Copyright © 1971 by The Regents of the University of California
First printing, 1971
First Paperback Edition, 1972
ISBN: O-520-02255-6
Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 67-18899
The original edition from which this translation has
been made was published in Paris by Editions du Cerf,
under the tttie Qu-esi-ce que le Cinema? The essays
in this first English edition were selected by the
translator, and are published by arrangement with
Editions du Cerf, All rights reserved.
4 S S 7 8 9
FOREWORD
by Franfois Truffaut
AtJDRfi Ba2JN wrote about film better than anybody else ia Europe. From
that day in 1948 when he got me my first film job, working alongside Iwn,
I became his adopted son. Thereafter, every pleasant thing that happened
in my life I owed to him.
He taught me to write about the cinema, corrected and publkhed my
first articles, and helped me to become a director. He died only a few
hours after I had finished my first day's shooting. When, on bemg sent for
by his friend Pere Leger, I arrived at his home in Nogent, he looked up
at me but could no longer speak and was in acute pain. The previous
evening he had been watching Le Crime de Monsieur Lange on televi-
sion and making notes for the book he was preparing on Jean Renoir.
If I were asked to give a picture of Andr6 Ba2dn the first thing that
would occur to me would be a caption from an American magazine: "The
most unforgettable character I've met.'*
Andii Bazin, like the characters in the plays of Giraudoux, was a
creature from the times before Original Sin. Although we aE knew him for
a good and honest man, his goodness was nevertheless an endless surprise,
so abundandy was it manifest. To talk with Mm was what bathing in the
Ganges must be for a Hindu. Such was his generosity of spirit that I some-
V
Foreword
times found myself deliberately running down a common acquaintance
just for the pleasure of hearing Andre defend him.
While he had a heart as big as a house he was also logic itself, a being
of pure reason and a superlative dialectician. He had complete faith in the
power of argument and I have seen him win over the toughest policeman,
being helped rather than hindered by a stammer thanks to which he was
able to rivet people's attention. He would expose a dishonest argument by
first taking over his adversary's thesis, developing it better than had the
man himself, and then demolishing it with rigorous logic. Only in the
articles of Sartre, whom Baziii particularly admired, does one find a com-
parable intelligence and similar intellectual honesty.
His chronic physical ill health was paralleled by his constantly surpris-
ing moral strength. He would borrow money aloud but lend it with a
whisper. In his presence everything became simple, clear, and above-
board. Since he considered it wicked to ride in a four-seat car all alone, he
often picked up three other people at the bus stop in Nogent, whom he
would then drop off along his route in Paris. Whenever he and his wife
and small son went away for a few weeks he would look about among his
innumerable friends for a couple not so comfortably housed to whom he
could lend his house, and then find someone to lend his car to.
He loved the cinema, but still more he loved life, people, animals, the
sciences, the arts; just before he died he planned to make a short film
about the litde known romanesque churches of France. He kept all sorts
of pets, a chameleon, a parrot, squirrels, tortoises, a crocodile and other
creatures I cannot list because I don't know how to spell their names; not
long before he died, he had been force-feeding some kind of lizard, an
iguana from Brazil, stuffing pieces of hard-boiled egg into its mouth with
a little stick. "I'm afraid," he said, "that I'll die before this poor creature
does."
Whether the world be good or evil I cannot say, but I am certain that
it is men like Bazin who make it a better place. For, in believing life to
be good and behaving accordingly, Andre had a beneficial effect on all
who came in contact with him, and one could count on the fingers of one
hand those who behaved badly toward him. Everyone who ever talked
VI
Foreword
with him, even if only once, could call him theii "best friend," since in
meeting him, overwhelmed by such integrity, it was impossible not to give
the best that was m one.
Andre Bazin was too warm a person to allow us to use such boUow
phrases about him as "living still" or "still in our midst," and so on. The
cruel, the truly desoiatljig, the profoundly sad fact is that he is dead. All
we can do is to weep and reread him. Not long ago I came across a
passage in a letter of his that characterizes his critical approach: "I'm
sorry I couldn't see Mizoguchi's films again with you at the Cinema-
theque. I rate Mm as highly as you people do and I claim to love him the
more tecause I love Kurosawa too, who is the other side of the coin:
would we know the day any better if there were no night? To dislike Kuro-
sawa because one loves Mizoguchi is only the first step toward under-
standing. Unquestionably anyone who prefers Kurosawa must be incurably
blind but anyone who loves only Mizoguchi is one-eyed. Throughout the
arts there runs a vein of the contemplative and mystical as well as an ex-
pressionist vein."
vii
CONTENTS
Translator's Introduction 1
An Aesthetic of Reality: Cinematic Realism and the
Italian School of the Liberation 1 6
La Terra Trema 41
Bicycle Thief 47
De Sica: Metteur en Scene 61
Umberto D : A Great Work 79
Cabiria: The Voyage to the End of Neorealism 83
In Defense of Rossellini 93
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux 1 02
Limelight, or the Death of Moliere 1 24
The Grandeur of Limelight 128
The Western, or the American Film par excellence 140
The Evolution of the Western 149
Entomology of the Pin-Up Girl 158
The Outlaw 163
Marginal Notes on Eroticism in the Cinema 169
The Destiny of Jean Gabin 176
Notes 179
Index 195
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION
FOUR YEARS AGO in his forewoid to the first English volume of What is
Cimtm? Jean Renoir spoke of the influence that Andre Bazin would un-
doubtedly exercise in the years ahead. The truth of this is already being
borne out in various ways and places. In English-speaking countries, for
example, his name appears increasingly in critical studies of film. In France
his continued importance as an authority to be reckoned with has again
been recognized by the fact that some Marxist film critics seem to have
felt it essential to return to the attack against his theories with something
of the urgency — if not with quite the same vituperation — yet with the
identical arguments of the original assault in the pages of Positij in 1962:
a protracted invective spread over two issues and running to approxi-
mately eighty pages. (They considered it their duty, they said — ^wilh the
help of words like "charlatan" and "naif" — to "demystify a pope"!)
Paradoxical though it may sound in speaking of a critic whose work
at first reading appears so cerebral, the key to any true understanding of
the man and his work is the word love — spumed by Positij as a catch-all,
a term of mystification. "He loved the cinema," Francois TniJfaut tells
us in Ms foreword, "but more than the cinema, he loved life, people,
animals, science, the arts."
In the commemorative number of Colliers du Cinema that appeared
after Bazin's death, Truffaut likened him to a "companion of St. Francis
of Assisi possessed of a kind of goodness at once comical and touching."
1
What Is Cinetrm?
Nothing could illustrate this better than the charming and humorous article
that appeared in Cahiers (January, 1959) after his return to France from
a film festival in South America, in which he describes his efforts, happily
successful in spite of every official and unofficial obstacle, to bring home
a parrot.
In the same commemorative issue of Cahiers, Claude Vernaorel also
spoke of Ba2in's "natural Franciscan goodness," The significance of these
comparisons extends to something far beyond their surface meaning as
can be seen, for example, from his essays on neoreahsm and from the im-
portance he attaches to the recurrent (and, for his opponents, objection-
ably "idealist") phrase "respect for reality." If I were making a film of his
life I would open on a significantly associative or symbolic shot of Bazin
in his critical, beginning twenties, as he crosses the square in front of St.
Sulpice, a large and somber-looking structure and long the embodiment
of all that was somber and solemn about traditional French Catholicism.
The name of the church is additionally significant since it was adopted
by a congregation of priests of which his friend and colleague Amedee
Ayfre would later become a member. Bossuet and Fenelon, equally sym-
bolic seventeenth-century churchmen, stare frozenly down at him as he
moves, his mind full of what they would consider theologically revolu-
tionary ideas, toward his destination, the Cafe St. Sulpice. Gathered there
at one of their regular editorial meetings are a group of writers who form
part of the staff of Esprit, a literary review founded in 1932 to which
Andre later contributed regularly, between 1949 and 1957. Among those
present are the Catholic P.-A. Touchard and the Protestant — some say
the non-believer — ^Roger Leenhardt, the one a writer, the other also a
film maker, both to become close friends of Bazin. We might find there,
loo, Bazaine the painter and two distinguished men of the theater, Jacques
Coppeau and Dullin, the author of an unusual autobiographical study of
acting for both stage and screen. Souvenirs et notes de travail d'un acteur.
This would be no invented movie scene. Such a meeting actually took
place some time during the period immediately preceding World War IL
Bazin had come to meet Touchard v^th whom he had been in corres-
pondence, at the latter's invitation, to make his formal acquaintance and
2
Translator's Introduction
to discuss the Esprit group which Bazin had founded at the Ecole Nornial
Superieure at St. Cloud, where he was training to be a teacher. These
groups, centers for philosophical, theological, and sociological discussion,
were encouraged and supported by the French Personalist movement,
the guiding spirit and main driving force behind which was Emmanuel
Mounier (1905-1950). When writing later of Bazm, Touchard referred
to Mounier as "their common master from whom Bazin had acquired his
ahnost invincible passion for abstract terminology." But he had acquired
more than that from Mounier.
Bazin has left no specific philosophical testament but it appears hke
a watermark (to use a favorite comparison of Ms) in the texture of his
writings and the more we examine this texture the more we see what
Touchard meant when he called Mounier their common master, although
one feels that it is not a case of a pupil learning at the knee, but rather
of a mind that had found its fellow. The philosophy of Mounier is a varia-
tion of the Personalist movement that existed in different forms in France,
the United States, England, Holland, Switzerland, and elsewhere. Its ap-
proach to life, to man and to his place in the cosmos and society and to his
relations with his fellows, was initially developed while Mounier was at
the University of Grenoble, his native city. Its basis was the affirmation
of the existence of free and creative persons and it mtroduces into the
structure of its thought the idea of the unforeseen which naturally rules
out any desire for definitive systemization. "Nothing," Mounier wrote,
"is more repugnant than the fondness so common nowadays for a ma-
chine to think and act for us, an automatic distributor of solutions and
recommendations; such a thing is a barrier to research, an insurance against
disquiet (Angst) or any sort of self-testing or the taking of rjsks." In order
therefore to get away from the idea of Personalism as a rigid system he sug-
gests that one should avoid talking of Personalism; rather one should think
of it in the plural, that is of personalisms — Qmstian, agnostic, and so on.
One can readily see how this openness, this pluralistic tone, with its sense
of individual freedom so evidently reflected in Baaan's writings, must irk
his Marxist critics.
The thinkers who most influenced Mounier were the Russian Ber-
3
What Is Cinema?
diaeff, Bergson, Bergson's former pupil the neo-Thomist Jacques Mari-
tain, but above all Charles Peguy (1873-1914), a poet, an ardent Cath-
oUc, and an equally ardent socialist who inscribed his first book Jeanne
d'Arc to "those women and men who have dedicated their lives to the
establishment of the world-wide socialist republic,"
In 1932, when he launched Esprit, Mounier summed up the position
of the movement as follows : "We are looking for a camping ground some-
where between Bergson and Peguy, Maritain and Berdiaeff, Prudhon
and deMan." At that time, as Daniel de Rops the historian describes
them, they were a generation without masters, trying ;o break free from
the lesser masters of literature they had followed at the University and ig-
norant as yet of the works of Kierkegaard, Marx and Jaspers. But this was
to change and later Mounier was to write that "the task of our age will
be perhaps not to try in vain to heal the seemingly imhealable breach that
now exists between the followers of Kierkegaard and Marx but to attempt
to retrace our steps to the moment of what might be called the Socratic
revolution of the nineteenth century, the assault on all the forces of the
time that were attempting to depersonalize man. This assault unfortu-
nately separated into two, one went in the direction taken by Kierkegaard
recaUing contemporary man, dazzled by the discovery and exploitation
of the world, to an awareness of his subjectivity and his freedom; the other
way was taken by Marx who denounced the processes of mystification in
which man had been caught up by a social structure that had been grafted
onto his material condition and reminded him, instead, that his destiny
lay not only with his heart but with his hands." It was a deplorable divi-
sion that could only continue to grow wider. Personalism was then to at-
tempt somehow to nullify this, to be the "third force" placed between
capitalism and communism, detesting the former and sharing many ideas
in common with the latter.
Mounier admired the writings of Teilhard de Chardin who, he said,
had restored a cosmic perspective to the Christian message. He was like-
wise much concerned with existentiahsm. "Personalism and existential-
ism," he said, "agree about one thing in particular, the struggle agabst the
system'* and he called Personalism a branch of the existential tree. It is
4
a philosophy of existence before being a philosophy of essence, an idea
which is echoed passim in Bazin, for example in the essay on neorealism:
"They (tJie neorealist directors) never forget that the world is, before it
is something to be condemned" (p. 21). Capitalism was one of Moun-
ier's main targets. For him it was odious and inhuman and his criticism
of it is said to be superior to that of Marx. He denounced the compromise
Christians have made with it. He likewise agreed widi Peguy that the bour-
geoisie in leaving aside grandeur for tranquility had allowed itself to be
eaten away by a mortal malady and had corrupted the people. Like Ber-
nanos, he observed that its chief fault was to inject into every level of so-
ciety "the worst of poisons, namely, mediocrity" (Moix. E. Mounier, Edi-
tions du Seine, Paris, 1960).
I have dwelled at some length on these various ideas of the "master"
sin(x without a minimum, at least, of Personalist philosophy before him
the reader will not know what soil it was that nourished Bazin' s theory
of cinema and his aesthetics, his vision of the world and of society, or
of ideals that inspired him— nor will they be aware how unjustified and
ill-informed is the shallow "odium theologicum" of his Marxist critics.
The fervor of the disciple had been early evident to Touchard in the
energy Bazin devoted to the Esprit group at the Ecole Normale at St. Qoud
and also to a second group that he had set up during a summer vacation at
La Rochelle, two members of which were a revolutionary young abbe
and a Protestant pastor.
That his fervor lasted we see from various pieces of evidence, for ex-
ample in his review in Esprit of Lousiam Story ten years or so later, in
which he insists that his readers see the film. If they do not go or if they
do not at least make a firm resolve to go, then they are not worthy to be
readers of Esprit. A friend of his young days recalls, in the course of a
touching obituary poem, how Bazin as a student helped to circulate
"underground" copies of the writings of Teilhard de Chardin whose
works were banned from publication by his ecclesiastical superiors for
fear of their possible unorthodoxy. Who, reading Bazin or de Chardin,
can fail to hear some of the ideas and even some of the vocabulary echoing
from one to the other?
5
What Is Cinema?
What was it that drew this young man to the cinema, his enthusiasm
for which has been described as part of his passion for culture, for the
truth? Bearing in mind what we have just outlined of the philosophy that
appeared to attract him, and likewise his own exquisitely sensitive aware-
ness of the beauty of the landscape of the world and of all it contains, I
think it would not be wrong to conclude that the attraction in great part lay
in the camera's special relation to all of this, to life and movement, to
reality. It permitted him in a special way to dwell on everything he prized.
As he himself said, "The cinema more than any other art is bound up with
love," Small wonder then that he immersed himself in u, eagerly followed
its evolution, and resisted any abuse of an instrument that permitted him
the thrill of following this ever-moving "asymptote" — a word he charac-
teristically borrowed from mathematics — that must reach out to, yet ever
fall short of that "realism" that would be its own destruction.
These speculations arise not unnaturally from an ever closer study of
his writing. What is not speculation is the influence of the man who shared
with Francois TrufEaut his dedication of the first volume of his collected
essays — Roger Leenhardt, Jean Louis TeUaney says that "Bazin was
conquered by Leenhardt who was passionately devoted to the cinema"
and this is also the view of Georges Sadoul. We have Bazin's own assess-
ment of Leenhardt as the man who wrote with the most subtlety about the
cinema. We have, finally, the testimony of Leenhardt himself. "He [Bazin]
was kind enough to say that my column in Esprit where he replaced me
had influenced him in his vocation as a critic." One of the reasons, and
not the least of them, that led Leenhardt to give up writing about the
cinema "without regret" was that what Bazm wrote "was a continuation
of what I was doing and he took it beyond what I was trying to do."
Certainly, from Bazin's review of Leenhardt's Dernieres vacances, a
most deft handling of the art of making gentle criticism seem like warm
praise, it is evident how far the pupil had advanced and what an accom-
plished critic he had already become by the time he took over Leenhardt's
column and became a regular member of the Esprit staff of contributors,
Leenhardt also tells us that Bazin was impressed and to some extent
influenced by Malraux's now famous essay Sketch for a Psychology of the
Motion Picture {Verve, Vol. V, No. 2, 1940). The likeness between
6
some of the ideas in this essay and Bazin's Ontology of the Photographic
Image is marked. Both are concerned with the art of painting as distinct
from the technique of representation, -Both speak in substance of the
cinema as the natural climax to what Malraux describes as the "frantic
headlong quest of movement by the votaries of representation at the end
of the baroque period." Both use the comparison of an "identity card."
There appear, however, to be points of divergence notably on the transi-
tion from the silent to the talking picture as discussed by Bazin in another
essay. The references common to both critics that are reflected in these
pages are to cinema and myth, particularly as they relate to Chaplin and
to Bazin's analysis of Monsieur Verdoux.
So widespread does Bazin's reading seem that an addict of the hal-
lowed process of Forschungsquellen might produce all kinds of parallels
even from so far afield as de Rerum Natura of Lucretius and his theory
of images.
At the editorial meetings of Esprit Bazin's presence was strongly felt,
"There was a daimon in this fellow," a colleague wrote after Bazin's death,
"who could make people normally bored with cinema fall in love with it.
When he arrived at an editorial meeting its tone would change and the
subject under discussion take on a different shape. Automatically everyone
would start talking film. But actually we were just spectators and Bazin
made no attempt to convince us of the truth of what he was saying. Just
by his being there we felt that what we were searching for in current events,
even the most trivial ones, the bits and pieces of news or of political argu-
ments, the details of our day-to-day existence, all was to be found in that
troubled pool that reflected the changing world of the twentieth century."
Of the essays in this volume those on eroticism and on the western
together with the one on Gabin are from the third volume of his collected
works entitled Cinema and Sociology. The rest are from the fourth volume,
Neorealism: An Aesthetic of Reality. The western attracted Bazin early,
m particular for what it revealed to him of the history and sociology of
the West, and characteristically he sees similarities between the cowboy
and the knight of courtly French literature and between the women in the
7
What Is Cinema?
new West placed by force of social circumstances upon a pedestal, and
the idealized woman of courtly love. Although the statement with which
he introduces his *'Notes on Eroticism in the Cinema" (once more be-
come singularly relevant) may appear less than prophetic any judgment
of his views will depend to some extent on whether one agrees that the
nude productions of today — their content naturally affected by their form
— are theater according to the common and traditional meaning of that
word, and what the role of the actor is therein. In any event it is difficult
to believe that if Bazin were writing today his own views would have
changed and for two reasons. First, they seem to be firmly rooted in the
conception of the actor's role as set forth by Diderot in Le Parndoxe du
comedien, namely that his function is to stir the public without exper-
iencing the emotions himself and, secondly, that making love like death
cannot be performed for another. They are moments uniquely to be lived
through and cannot, by definition, be treated as "objects." It is interesting,
from anodier point of view, to see how Bazin distinguishes between the
impact of nudity on the stage and on the screen, the effect of the former
being more powerful since it is in an actual place. The nude on the
screen on the other hand is in an imaginary place. Does not this argue
some modification ten years later of his earlier views on the essence of the
theater? ('^Theater and Cinema," What Is Cinema? Vol. 1, p. 95.)
There is a quality present m some of these essays, particularly in "The
Outlaw" and "The Entomology of the Pin-up Girl" and also in much of
Bazin's other work that, to the best of my knowledge, is never alluded to —
his humor. Unfortunately his admirers tend to praise him with solemn in-
tensity while his detractors excommunicafe him with whatever is the solemn
Marxist equivalent of beU, book, and candle. Thus the grasp of both on
the quintessential Bazin is weakened.
His capacity to bring a dialectical brilliance (in the scholastic not the
Hegelian sense) to the defense of lost causes or at least of causes in great
need of friends is admirably illustrated in his superb analysis of Limelight
and Monsieur Verdoux. The masterly essay on Verdoux is developed from
an article that appeared originally in Les Temps Modernes, (December,
1947). It was in reply to an unfavorable review of the film by Natalie
8
Moffat, also printed in Les Temps Modernes (July, 1947) which was
the second of two articles by hsr on the film, the first describing its actual
production, after she had visited the ChapJin sludios. Bazin had seen the
film in Czechoslovakia and found that the Czechs had had the same re-
action to it as Natalie Moffat. "The Marxists," he said, "regretted the
absence of any socially useful lesson."
Charles Bremond, reviewing Bazin's third volume of essays in the first
number of Communication, a publication of the Centre d'Etudes des
Commurdcations de Masse, founded just prior to the publication of these
essays, praises it as a mine of suggestions, some of them daring and para-
doxical but all of them stimulating, to be regarded, however, as the work
of a critic not of a sociologist. Thus he calls it a philosophy of the social
order rather than sociology. It raises the question, he says, of the relation
of sociology and aesthetics, the former being descriptive, the latter norma-
tive. He is particularly disturbed by the handling of the myth of Verdoux.
To grasp the dialectical relation between Charlie and Verdoux, he argues,
is beyond the reach of the general public. For them the only myth is the
myth of Chariie. This myth alone has been the real box-office attraction.
Limelight and Verdoux were failures. Only the exceptional eye of Bazin
could establish the Charlie- Verdoux relationship. He does admit, however,
that the notion is ingenious, even plausible. So, perhaps he has answered
his own question and in the years since this review appeared there has
grown up a widespread understanding of the Charlie-Verdoux relationship.
In addition to the subject matter that is their main concern, the essays
of Bazin are uniformly rich in what might be called parenthetical insights,
in associations of ideas, that derive from a combination of wide reading and
a synthetic spirit. The essays on neo realism are no exception. The com-
parison he so adroitly draws for example between the novels of the Ameri-
can critical realists and the neorealist directors argues a penetradfig grasp
of the literary scene in both countries. Above all, these essays shed an
important light on Bazin's attitude on the question of "montage as against
depth of focus." He thought the debate had died down and said so in an
article in the first number of Cahiers du Cinema entitled "A Final Word
About Depth of Focus" (April, 1951 ). Nobody talked about it anymore,
9
Wfmt Is Cinema?
he said» because il had become common practice. In a pertinent passage
he explains how in a scene in Th£ Little Foxes Wyler had placed a metal
box containing important documents in such a position relative to the two
characters in the scene that no one could miss its importance. Montage
would have shown all this in a series of cuts. "In other words," says Bazin,
"the single-shot sequence as used by directors today does not renounce
montage — ^how coald it without returning cinema to a state of primitive
jibtering? — it makes montage part of the structure of the film."
Bazin did not live to see that his "final word" about depth of focus
was nothing of the sort. M. Godan of the staff of Posilij saw to this on
the occasion of the publication of the collected essays. Reviewing them
in the protracted article to which I referred above and sarcastically entitled
"Eulogy for Andre Bazin," he deals at length in an attack on the whole
of Bazin's "system," particularly with what is "rightly or wrongly the
best-known part of Bazin's system, his critique of montage," The ultimate
source of this and of everything else is reputed to be Christian theology
and Bazin, presumably an "opiate" addict, is dismissed as a bourgeois
idealist. The ambiguity which Bazin posits in the face of reality and of the
cinematic image of reahty is ridiculed alike in the text and in the title of
the first installment "The Delights of Ambiguity."
The most recent revival of the controversy was in Les Temps Mod-
ernes (December, 1970) in an article entitled "AU Films are Political," in
which Christian Zimmer attempts to lay the foundations for a new criti-
cism of cinema which would call for the elimination of any notion of the
film image as an "impression of reality." In their concern to give film a
cultural stams the critics had overlooked, it seems, the economic process
in fihn production. All films therefore made under capitalism are inescap-
ably bourgeois including those made with the best of proletarian inten-
tions.
Hitherto most critics, being men of letters, have treated cinema as if
it were literature. This, according to Zimmer, is the idealist approach and
the foremost representative of that approach is Bazin, His theory and that
of his followers rest upon one simple fallacy — ^the transparence of the cine-
matic spectacle, the fallacy of seeing the screen as a mirror or a window
10
Translator's Introduction
open onto the world, with, in consequence, intimations of the invisible
and, by inference, of the spiritual. This fallacy is the basis for Baztn's
phobia about montage. He is confusing the thing represented with the rep-
resentation. The image is not a fragment of reality, it is the produce of
labor. Labor makes use of reality as an ingredient in the process, but this
process does not render reality back in its original purity. Thus the obses-
sion of Bazin with concrete reality is in line with the broad tradition of
bourgeois humanism which sees in painstaking and preconceived realism
the ideal of the artist, in other words a kind of photographic prowess for
its own sake. The solution is to escape from this reality-related system, to
speak with a "class tongue" and forget that figment of the commercial
imagination "the public," Most importantly, it would seem, concern for
the impression of reality neutralizes the subversive power of the film.
Clearly here, as with all the arguments used by these critics to attack
the views of Bazin, we are faced with Mounier's "unhealable breach."
Short of taking the discussion back step by step to the historical and ma-
terial dialectic from which they derive and beginning the argument from
there, there is no way to deal with them, for they are arguments put for-
ward not on their own intrinsic merits but from authority. For the rest, one
is left only to deplore the treatment accorded by them to the works of a
critic who approached the cinema with a rich sense of the elusive para-
doxes of art and hence of aesthetics. One wonders indeed if Gozlan or
Zimmer have truly examined their subject.
If they had, how can they talk of him, against the clear evidence both
of Bazin's own writings and of the philosophy of Personalism which he
shared, and which I purposely outlined at some length, as bourgeois and
presumably the dupe, as they would call it, of capitalist ideology? Again,
if they had, they surely would have shown a fuller understanding of his
position in the argument over montage and depth of focus.
Furthermore why do they msist on seeing in his concept of "reality"
and of the cinema's obligation to respect reality only an indication of the
mental subservience of Bazin the pious Catholic? In fact, its antece-
dents date back five centuries before the Christian era. Have they never
heard of the philosopher Xenophanes who, gazing up at the heavens, pro-
11
What Is Cinema?
claimed "the all is one"? Or of Parmenides who saw this whole as a con-
tinuum? Indeed if there had been cinema in those days one could imagjne
a similar argument to the present one going on between the schools of
Parmenides and Heraclitus. It was these philosophers who first saw the
cosmos or "reality" as a whoL. For Plato it was a structured whole, the
parts of which are held together by the force of love. Bazin then, the "pious
Catholic," is in splendid philosophical company, the company not only
of Plato but of the Stoics with their cosmic piety, of Boethius, of Sallus-
tius, to cite but some of the ancients. It is a tradition likewise that saw this
world, and all that is in it, as good and as such to be loved. "Everything
exists," said Sallustius, using a Platonic argument, "because of some good-
ness in it." The first cause of all is the Good.
As for ambiguity — is there no mystery about the very concept of mat-
ter? No ambiguity? When Lenin proclaims that matter is infinite in itself
and exists eternally is he not proclaiming a mystery as unfathomable as if
he had substituted the word God for matter?
Bazin had a strong and subde sense of the evolution of the techniques
in the use of which reality is "respected." They are the instruments of an
art dedicated to reality — an art of which he used the word "asymp-
tote," perhaps the most illuminating of the words he borrows from the
sciences. For him a paradox lay behind tiiis word, the paradox of a realism
that is profoundly aesthetic. Paradox indeed is truly the essence not only of
his style, but of his mental processes. It is his own particular dialectic
which, like his humor, it is dangerous to overlook.
Jean Mitry, to whom Gozlan and Zimmer turn for support, in reality
stands somewhere between them and Bazin. He disagrees with the manner
in which Bazin predicates reality of the image, but when one reads all he
has to say one feels that while his rational processes lead Mm to this con-
clusion, something inside him, a less purely analytical sense of cinema,
inclines him in Bazin's direction. The filmic image, says Mitry, gives us an
arbitrary, not a true, reality. It is not an exact image of the real. Reality
is fragmented by camera angles, framing, points of view that arrange these
fragments according to relative periods of duration and endow them with
a meaning other than that which they had as part of the universal decor.
Relations between them now exist that were not present in the original
12
and true reality. From this there results a discontinuous spatio-temporal
development different from the real space-time continuum, a statement
that seems to explain why Zimmer calls Mitry to witness.
Bazin's reply would be to agree that of course some kind of transfor-
mation takes place and by this, if one may here insert a gloss, he would
mean the kind of change that is imphed in the concept of mimesis as it
has come down to us from Aristotle's Poetics when we relate it to cinema.
He would repeat what he has said about ellipsis as used for example by
Rossellini in the presentation of events, about the filtering of reality through
the director's consciousness, a concept which gives rise to his assertion
that there is no such thing properly speaking as neorealism. There are
only neorealist directors whether they be materialists, Christians, Com-
munists, or whatever. The essential thing is that in this mimetic process
there be no cheating on reality however the process of "imaging" is car-
ried out.
"The reality produced by the cinema at wiU and which it organizes is
the reality of the world of which we are part and of which the film receives
a mold at once spatial and temporal." The word "organizes" shows that he
accepts the idea of some kind of change, of artifice in short. Did not Bazin
say — m praise of Eisenstein's Potemkin, no less — that there is no art with-
out artifice and that one must sacrifice something of reality in the process
of achieving it?
Mitry on the other hand prefers to talk not of the "coefficient of real-
ity" in the image but of the "coefficient of unreality," of a strange quality
which he admits may give a handle to the spiritually inclined. However,
such a feeling is not justified, he says, arising as it does simply from the
phenomenon of perception, And what is more magical, may one ask, more
mystifying than the act of perception? So much for the purely philoso-
phizing Mitry. On the final page of the second volume of his Esthetique du
Cinema, however, he takes a definite step, it seems to me, in Bazin's direc-
tion: "If the cinema is an art it is an art created in the face of every restric-
tion imposed on art. Certainly art is a pathway to transcendence [sic] but it
owes it to itself to lead the way there rather than just to reproduce it and
to lead the way via immanence and liberty. Only the cinema can do this,
for its prime element is life itself!"
13
What Is Cinema?
So far we have discussed only the French situation. Baiin's "Defense
of Rossellini" is evidence thai there were (and there stiU are) confronta-
tions in Italy. RosseUini also bore witness to this in an interview in Cahiers
(July, 1954) in which he said that at that time the political struggle had
become so feverish that people were no longer free to make judgments and
directors were dictated to by their political beliefs. This was a particularly
unsatisfactory slate of affairs for him, since, as he said, "It is primarily from
the moral viewpoint that I look at the world, only later does it become an
aesthetic viewpoint" (a statement strangely reminiscent of one of Lenin's:
"Today's ethic will be tomorrow's aesthetic").
At the time he was making Open City there was, RosseUini said, "a
tremendous need for truth. I always respect neorealism for that. We were
maintaining a moral position more than a style," This was Bazin's view.
It was a Marxist, Ugo Barbaro, who coined the word neorealism, how-
ever, and it was the Marxists who were its films' first critics. No actual defi-
nition of the word was ever established and a congress at Parma in Decem-
ber, 1952, called to try and arrive at one, failed to do so.
I spoke earlier of love as the key to an understanding of Bazin's
writings. I said also that his friends saw in Mm a Hkeness to Francis of
Assisi. I also said that this association carried a special significance. No-
where is this more apparent than in the essays on neorealism. It seems to
give him a peculiar insight into the films of RosseUini, De Sica, and Fel-
lini and into the writings of Zavatdni. For Bazin, La Strada was of Fran-
ciscan inspiration. Of De Sica and Zavattini's Bicycle Thief he writes,
"Its true meaning lies in not betraying the essence of things, in allowing
them first to exist for their own sakes, freely; it is to love them in their
single individual reality. 'My . . . little sister reality,' says De Sica, and
she circles about him like the birds around St. Francis. Others put her in a
cage or teach her to talk, but De Sica talks to her and it is the true language
of reality, that we hear, the word that caniiot be denied, that only love
can express." Bazin has said he was no philosopher. He could never have
denied, however, that he was a poet. What indeed could put more cleariy
his values, which St. Francis himself long ago foreshadowed in his
immortal Canticle of All Created Things, which Mourner called "a beau-
tiful piece of medieval realism" :
14
Be praised my Lord with all your creatures especially master brother
Sun who brings day, and you give light by him and he is fair and
radiant with a great shining and he draws his meaning most high
from you . . .
Be praised my Lord for sister moon and the stars in heaven . . .
for brother wind . . . and for the air . for sister our mother earth . . .
Today we inevitably ask what would Bazin be offering us now from the
treasury of his paradoxes?
One, perhaps the greatest of all, has been preserved for us by a col-
league of his writing of him in Esprit after his death: "Has he not de-
clared that the year 2000 will salute the advent of a cinema free of the
artificialities of montage, renouncing the role of an 'art of reahty' so
that it may climb to its final level on which it will become once and for all
'reality made art' " — perhaps in the way he forsees it in the concluding
sentence of his essay on Umberto D.
It now remains for me to thank all those to whom I had recourse with
problems of translation. In particular may I thank Professor Stephen
Werner of the French Department at the University of California, Los
Angeles, for bis invaluable help. Likewise my good friend and editor
Ernest Callenbach for his endless patience and his skillful editorial hand
always gloved in the velvet of his tact.
H. G.
15
AN AESTHETIC
OF REALITY: NEO REALISM
(Cinematic Realism
and the Italian School of the Liberation)
THE HISTORICAL importance of of Rossellini's film Paisa has been rightly
compared with that of a number of classical screen masterpieces. Georges
Sadoul has not hesitated to mention it alongside Nosferatu, Die Nibelun-
gen, or Greed. I subscribe wholeheartedly to this high praise as long as
the allusion to German expressionism is understood to refer to the level of
greatness of the film but not to the profound nature of the aesthetics in-
volved. A better comparison might be with the appearance in 1925 of
Potemkin. For the rest, the realism of the current Italian films has been
frequently contrasted with the aestheticism of American and, in part, of
French productions. Was it not from the outset their search for realism
that characterised the Russian films of Eisenstein, Pudovkin, and Dov-
jenko as revolutionary both in art and politics, in contrast to the ex-
pressionist aestheticism of the German films and Hollywood's mawkish
star worship? Paisa, Sciusca, and Roma Citta Aperta, like Potemkin, mark
a new stage in the long-standing opposition between realism and aestheti-
cism on the screen. But history does not repeat itself; we have to get clear
the particular form this aesthetic quarrel assumes today, the new solutions
to which Italian neorealism owed its triumph in 1947.
16
The Precursors
Confronted with the origmality of the Italian output, and in the en-
thusiasm engendered by the surprise that this has caused, we have perhaps
neglected to go deeply into the origins of this renaissance, preferring to see
it rather as something spontaneously generated, issuing like a swarm of
bees from the decaying corpses of fascism and the war. There is no ques-
tion that the Liberation and the social, moral, and economic forms that it
assumed in Italy have played a decisive role in jBIm production. We shall
return to this later. It was simply a lack of information about the Italian
cinema that trapped us into believing in a sudden miracle.
It could weU be that, today, Italy is the country where the understand-
ing of film is at its highest, to judge by the importance and the quality of
the Mm output. The Centro Sperimentale at Rome came into existence be-
fore our own Institut des Hautes Etudes Cinematographiques; above all,
intellectual speculation in Italy is not, as it is in France, without its impact
on film-making. Radical separation between criticism and direction no
more exists in the Italian cinema than it does in France in the world of
literature.
Furthermore, fascism which, unlike Nazism, allowed for the existence
of artistic pluralism, was particularly concerned with cinema. One may have
reservations about the connection between the Venice film festival and the
political interests of the Duce but one cannot deny that the idea of an inter-
national festival has subsequentiy made good, and one can measure its
prestige today by the fact that five or six European countries are vying for
the spoils. The capitaUsts and the Fascist authorities at least provided Italy
with modem studios. If they turned out films which were ridiculously
melodramatic and overly spectacular, that did not prevent a handful of
bright men, smart enough to shoot films on current themes without making
any concessions to the regime, from making high-quality films that fore-
shadowed their current work. If during the war we had not been, albeit
justifiably, so prejudiced, films like SOS 103 or La Nave Bianca of Rossel-
lini might have caught our attention more. In addition, even when capital-
17
ist or political stupidity controlled commercial production completely, in-
telligence, culture, and experimental research took refuge in publications,
in film archive congresses, and in making short films. In 1941, Lattuada,
director of II Bandito and, at the time, the head of the Milan archive,
barely escaped jail for showing the complete version of La Grande Illu-
sion. *
Beyond that, the history of the Italian cinema is little known. We stop
short at Cabiria and Quo Vadis, finding m the recent and memorable
La Corona di ferro all the proof we need that the supposed characteristics
of films made beyond the Alps remain unchanged : a taste, and a poor taste
at that, for sets, idealization of the principal actors, childish emphasis on
acting, atrophy of mise en scene, the dragging in of the traditional para-
phernalia of bel canto and opera, conventional scripts influenced by the
theater, the romantic melodrama and the chanson de geste reduced to an
adventure story. Undoubtedly too many Italian films do their best to justify
such a caricature and too many directors, including some of the best, sac-
rificed themselves, sometimes with self-irony, to commercial necessity. The
great spectacles like Scipio Afrkanus were, of course, the primary export.
There was another artistic vein, however, almost exclusively reserved for
the home market. Today, when the thunder of the charging elephants of
Scipio is only a distant rumble, we can the better lend an ear to the discreet
but delightful sounds made by Quattro passi fra le nuvole.
The reader, at least one who has seen this latter film, will undoubtedly
be as surprised as we were to leam that this comedy with its unfettered sen-
sibility, brimming over with poetry, the lightly handled socialist realism of
which is directly related to the recent Italian cinema, was shot in 1942,
two years after the famous La Corona di ferro and by the same director:
Blasetti, to whom, about the same time, we owe Un'avventura di Salvator
Rosa and most recently Un Giorno nella vita. Directors like Vittorio De
Sica who made the admirable Sciuscia were always concerned to turn out
human and sensitive comedies full of realism, among them, in 1942, I
Bambini ci guardano. Since 1932, Camerini has made Gli uomini che
♦ The influence of Jean Renoir on the Italian cinema is paramount and de-
finitive. Only that of Rene Clair in any way approaches it.
18
An Aesthetic of Reality
tnascalzoni, the action of which, like Roma Citta Aperta, is laid in the
streets of the capital and Piccolo Mondo Antico, no less typically Italian.
As a matter of fact, there are not so many new names among the direc-
tors in Italy today. The youngest, like Rossellini, started to make films at
the beginning of the war. Older directors, like Blasetti and Mario Soldaii,
were already known in the early days of the talkies.
Bat let us not go from one extreme to the other and conclude that there
is no such thing as a new Italian school. The realist trend, the domestic,
satirical, and social descriptions of everyday life, the sensitive and poetic
verism, were, before the war, minor qualities, modest violets flowering at
the feet of the giant sequoias of production. It appears that from the begin-
ning of the war, a light began to be shed on the papier-mache forests. In
La Corona di ferro the style seems to parody itself. Rossellini, Lattuada,
Blasetti were striving toward a realism of international importance. Never-
theless it is the Liberation that set these aesthetic trends so completely free
as to allow them to develop under new conditions that were destined to
have their share in inducing a noticeable change in direction and meaning.
The Liberation: Rupture and Renaissance
Some components of the new Italian school existed before the Libera-
tion: persormel, techniques, aesthetic trends. But it was their historical,
social, and economic combination that suddenly created a synthesis in
which new elements also made themselves manifest.
Over the past two years, Resistance and Liberation have furnished the
principal themes, but unlike the French, and indeed one might say unlike
the European cinema as a whole, Italian films have not been limited to
themes of the Resistance. In France, the Resistance immediately became
legendary. Recent as it was, on the day of the actual Liberation it already
belonged to the realm of history. The Germans having departed, life began
again. By contrast, in Italy the Liberation- did not signify a return to the
19
What Is Cinema?
old and recent freedom; it meant political revolution, Allied occupation,
economic and social upheaval. The Liberation came slowly through end-
less months. It had a profound effect on the economic, social, and moral
life of the country. Thus, in Italy, Resistance and Liberation, unlike the
Paris uprising, are in no sense just words with a historical connotation.
When Rosseilini made Paisd, his script was concerned with things actually
happening at the time. II Bandito showed how prostitution and the black
market developed on the heels of the advancing army, how disillusion and
lack of employment turned a liberated prisoner into a gangster. Except for
unmistakable Resistance films like Vivere in Pace or // Sole Sorge Ancora,
the Italian cinema was noted for its concern with actual day-to-day events.
The French critics had not failed to emphasize (whether in praise or blame
but always with solemn surprise) the few specific allusions to the postwar
period that Came deliberately btroduced into his last film. If the director
and Ms writer took so much trouble to make us understand this, it is be-
cause nineteen out of twenty French films cannot be dated within a decade.
On the other hand, even when the central scene of the script is not con-
cerned with an actual occurrence, Italian films are first and foremost re-
constituted reportage. The action could not unfold in just any social con-
text, historically neutral, partly abstract like the setting of a tragedy, as so
frequently happens to varying degrees with the American, French, or Eng-
lish cinema.
As a result, the Italian fihns have an exceptionally documentary qual-
ity that could not be removed from the script without thereby eliminating
the whole social setting into which its roots are so deeply sunk.
This perfect and natural adherence to actuality is explained and Justi-
fied from within by a sphitual attachment to the period. Undoubtedly,
the tide of recent Italian history cannot be reversed. Thus, the war is felt
to be not an interlude but the end of an era. In one sense Italy is only three
years old. But other efiects could have resulted from the same cause.
What is a ceaseless source of wonder, ensuring the Italian cinema a wide
moral audience among the Western nations, is the significance it gives to
the portrayal of actuality. In a world already once again obsessed by terror
and hate, in which reality is scarely any longer favored for its own sake
20
An Aesthetic of Reality
but rather is rejected or excluded as a political symbol, the Italian cinema
is certainly the only one which preserves, in the midst of the period it
depicts, 'a revolutionary humanism.
Love and Rejection of Reality
The recent Italian films are at least prerevolutionary. They all reject
implicitly or explicitly, with humor, satire or poetry, the reality they are
using, but they know better, no matter how clear the stand taken, than to
treat this reality as a medium or a means to an end. To condemn it does
not of necessity mean to be in bad faith. They never forget that the world
is, quite simply, before it is something to be condemned. It is silly and per-
haps as naive as Beaumarchais' praise of the tears induced by melodrama.
But does one not, when coming out of an Italian film, feel better, an urge
to change the order of things, preferably by persuading people, at least
those who can be persuaded, whom only blindness, prejudice, or ill-fortune
had led to harm their fellow men?
That is why, when one reads resumes of them, the scenarios of many
Italian films are open to ridicule. Reduced to their plots, they are often
just moralizing melodramas, but on the screen everybody in the film is
overwhelmingly real. Nobody is reduced to the condition of an object or
a symbol that would allow one to hate them in comfort without having
first to leap the hurdle of their humanity.
I am prepared to see the fundamental humanism of the current Italian
fihns as their chief merit.* They offer an opportunity to savor, before the
* I do not hide from myself the astule political role more or less consciously
concealed under this communicative generosity. It could happen that tomorrow
the priest in Roma Cittd A perta and the Communist former member of the Re-
sistance might not get on so well. It co\ild happen that the Italian cinema might
soon become political and partisan. There might be a few half-lies hidden some-
where in all this. The cleverly pro-American Paisa was shot by Christian Demo-
crats and Communists. But it is not being a dupe, it is simply being sensible to
accept in a work what is in it. At the moment the Italian cinema is more socio-
logical than political. By that I mean that such concrete social realities as poverty.
21
What Is Cinema?
time finally runs out on us, a revolutionary flavor in which terror has yet
no part.
An Amalgam of Players
What naturally first struck the public was the high quality of the acting.
Roma Ciitd Aperta enriched the world's screen with a performer of the
first order, Anna Magnani the unforgettable pregnant young woman, Fab-
rizzi the priest, Pagliero a member of the Resistance, and others whose
performances rival m retrospect the most stirring of film characterizations
in the past. Reports and news items in the public press naturally made a
point of letting us know that Sciusca was filled with genuine street urchins,
that Rossellini shot crowds taken at random at the scene of the action, that
the heroine of the first story of Paha was an illiterate girl discovered on
the dockside. As for Anna Magnani, admittedly she was a professional but
from the world of the cafe-concert. Maria Michi, well, she was just a
little giri who worked in a movie house.
Although this type of casting is "unusual in films, it is not new. On
the contrary, its continual use, by various realistic schools ever since the
days of Lumiere, shows it to be a true law of the cinema, which the Italian
the black market, the administration, proslitulion and unemployment do not seem
to have given place in the public conscience lo the a priori values of politics.
Italian films rarely tell us the political party of the director or whom he is intend-
ing to flatter. This state of affairs derives doubtless from ethnic temperament, but
it also derives from the political situation in Italy and what is customary in
the Communist party on that peninsula.
Political associations apart, this revolutionary humanism has its source like-
wise in a certain consideration for the individual; the masses are but rarely con-
sidered to be a positive social force. When they are mentioned it is usually in
order to demonstrate their destructive and negative character wis-a-vis the heroes:
the theme of the man in the crowd. From this point of view the two latest im^-
portanl Italian fi]ms> Caccia tragica and // sole mrge ancora, are significant ex-
ceptions, indicating perhaps a new trend.
The director De Santis who worked very closely with Vergano as his assistant
on // sole sorge ancora is the only one ever to take a group of men, a collective,
as the protagonist of a drama.
22
An Aesthetic oj Reality
school simpiy confirms and allows us to formulate with conviction. In
the old days of the Russian cinema too, we admired its preference for
nonprofessional actorJ who played on the screen the roles of their daily
lives. Actually, a legend has grown up around the Russian fihns. The
theater had a strong influence on certain Soviet schools and although the
early films of Eisenstein had no actors, as realist a film as The Road to
Life was in fact played by professionals from the theater and ever since then
the actors in Soviet films have contbued to be professionals, just as they
have in other countries.
No major cinematographic school between 1925 and the present
Italian cinema can boast of the absence of actors, but from time to time
a film outside the ordinary run will remind us of the advantage of not using
them. Such a film will always be specifically only slightly removed from a
social document. Take two examples: L'Espoir and La Derniere Chance.
Around them, too, a legend has grown up. The heroes in the Malraux
film are not all part-time actors called on for the moment to play their
day-to-day selves. It is true that some of them are, but not the principal
characters. The peasant, for example, was a well-known Madrid comic
actor. As regards La Derniere Chance, the Allied soldiers were actually
airmen shot down over Switzerland, but the Jewish woman was a stage
actress. Only productions like Tabu are entirely without professional actors,
but here, as in children's films, we are dealing with a special genre in
which a professional actor would be almost unthinkable. More recently,
Rouquier in Farrebique set out to play the game to the hilt. While noting
his success, let us also note that it is practically unique and that the prob-
lems presented by a peasant film, so far as the acting is concerned, are no
different from those of an exotic film. So far from being an example to
be followed, Farrebique is a special case in no way invalidating the law
that I propose to caU the law of the amalgam. It is not the absence of
professional actors that is, historically, the hallmark of social realism nor
of the Italian film. Rather, it is specifically the rejection of the star con-
cept and the casual mixing of professionals and of those who just act oc-
casionally. It is important to avoid casting the professional in the role for
which he is known. The public should* not be burdened with any pre-
23
What Is Cinema?
conceptions. It is significant that the peasant in Espoir was a theater
comedian, Anna Magnani a singer of popular songs, and Fabriz2i a music-
hall clown. That someone is an actor does not mean he must not be used.
Quite the opposite. But his professionalism should be called into service
only insofar as it allows him to be more flexible in his response to the
requirements of the tnise en scene, and to have a better grasp of the char-
acter. The nonprofessionals are naturally chosen for their suitability for
the part, either because they fit it physically or because there is some
parallel between the role and their lives. When the amalgamation comes
off — but experience shows that it will not unless some "moral" require-
ments are met in the script — the result is precisely that extraordinary
feeling of truth that one gets from the current Italian films. Their faith-
fulness to a script which stirs them deeply and which calls for the mini-
mum of theatrical pretense sets up a kind of osmosis among the cast. The
technical inexperience of the amateur is helped out by the experience of
the professionals while the professionals themselves benefit from the gen-
eral atmosphere of authenticity.
However, if a method so beneficent to the art of the cinema has only
been employed here and there, it is because unfortunately it contains within
itself the seeds of its own destruction. The chemical balance of the amal-
gam is of necessity unstable, and nothing can prevent it evolving to the
point at which it reintroduces the aesthetic dilemma it originally solved —
that between the enslavement of the star and the documentary with-
out actors. This disintegration can be observed most clearly and quickly
in children's films or films using native peoples. Little Rari of Tabu,
they say, ended up as a prostitute in Poland, and we all know what
happens to children raised to stardom by their first film. At best they turn
out to be infant actor prodigies, but that is something else again. Indis-
pensable as are the factors of inexperience and naivete, obviously they
cannot survive repetition. One cannot envisage the Farrebique family ap-
pearing in half a dozen films and finally being signed up by Hollywood.
As for the professionals who are not stars, the process of disintegration
operates a litde differently. The public is to blame. While an accepted
star is received everywhere as himself, the success of a film is apt to identify
24
An Aesthetic of Reality
the ordinary actor with the role he plays in it. Producers are only too glad
to repeat a success by catering to the weU-known public fondness for seeing
their favorite actors in their established roles. And even if an actor has
sense enough to avoid being confined to a single role, it is still a fact that
his face and some recurring manuerisms in his acting having become fa-
miliar will prevent the amalgara with nonprofessionals from taking place.
Aestheticism, Realism and Reality
Faithfulness to everyday life in the scenario, truth to his part in an
actor, however, are simply the basic materials of the aesthetic of the
Italian film.
One must beware of contrasting aesthetic refinement and a certain
c rudeness, a certain instant effectiveness of a realism which is satisfied just
to present reality. In my view, one merit of the Italian film will be that it has
demonstrated that every realism in art was first profoundly aesthetic. One
always felt it was so, but in the reverberations of the accusations of witch-
craft that some people today are making against actors suspected of a pact
with the demon of art for art's sake, one has tended to forget it. The real
like the imaginary in art is the concern of the artist alone. The flesh and
blood of reality are no easier to capture in the net of literature or cinema
than are gratuitous flights of the imagination. Or to put it another way, even
when inventions and complexity of forms are no longer being applied to the
actual content of the work, they do not cease thereby to have an influence
on the effectiveness of the means. Because the Soviet cinema was too for-
getful of this, it slipped in twenty years from first to last place among the
great film-producing nations. Potemkin turned the cinema world upside
down not just because of its political message, not even because it replaced
the studio plaster sets with real settings and the star with an anoynmous
crowd, but because Eistenstein was the greatest montage theoretician of his
day, because he worked with Tisse, the finest camerman of his day, and be-
cause Rassia was the focal point of cinematographic thought — in short,
What Is Cinema?
because the "realist" films Russia turned out secreted more aesthetic know-
how than all the sets and performances and lighting and artistic interpreta-
tion of the artiest works of German expressionism.
It is the same today with the Italian cinema. There is nothing aestheti-
cally retrogressive about its neorealism, on the contrary, there is progress
in expression, a triumphant evolution of the language of cinema, an ex-
tension of its stylistics.
Let us first take a good look at the cinema to see where it stands today.
Since the expressionist heresy came to an end, particularly after the arrival
of sound, one may take it that the general trend of cinema has been to-
ward realism. Let us agree, by and large, that film sought to give the spec-
tator as perfect an illusion of reality as possible within the limits of the
logical demands of cinematographic narrative and of the current limits
of technique. Thus the cinema stands in contrast to poetry, painting, and
theater, and comes ever closer to the novel. It is not my intention here to
justify this basic aesthetic trend of modem cinema, be it on technical,
psychological, or economic grounds. I simply state it for this once without
thereby prejudging either the intrinsic validity of such an evolution or the
extent to which it is final.
But realism in art can only be achieved in one way — through artifice.
Every form of aesthetic must necessarily choose between what is worth
preserving and what should be discarded, and what should not even be
considered^ feut when this aesthetic aims in essence at creating the illusion
of reality, as does the cinema, this choice sets up a fundamental contra-
diction which is at once unacceptable and necessary: necessary because
art can only exist when such a choice is made. Without it, supposing total
cinema was here and now technically -possible, we would go back purely
to reality. Unacceptable because it would be done definitely at the expense
of that reality which the cinema proposes to restore integrally. That is
why it would be absurd to resist every new technical development aiming
to add to the realism of cinema, namely sound, color, and stereoscopy.
Actually the "art" of cinema lives off this contradiction. It gets the most out
of the potential for abstraction and symbolism provided by the present
limits of the screen, but this utilization of the residue of conventions aban-
26
doned by technique can work either to the advantage or to the detriment
of realism. It can magnify or neutralize the effectiveness of the elements of
reality that the camera captures. One might group, if not classify in order
of importance, the various styles of cinematography in terms of the added
measure of reality. We would define as "realist," then> all narrative means
tending to bring an added measure of reality to the screen. Reality is not
to be taken quantitatively. The same event, the same object, can be rep-
resented in various ways. Each representation discards or retains various of
the qualities that permit us to recognize the object on the screen. Each in-
troduces, for didactic or aesthetic reasons, abstractions that operate more
or less corrosively and thus do not permit the original to subsist in its en-
tirety. At the conclusion of this inevitable and necessary "chemical" action,
for the initial reality there has been substituted an illusion of reality com-
posed of a complex of abstraction (black and white, plane surface), of con-
ventions (the rules of montage, for example), and of authentic reality. It is
a necessary illusion but it quickly induces a loss of awareness of the reality
itself, which becomes identified in the mind of the spectator with its cine-
matographic representation. As for the film maker, the moment he has se-
cured this unwitting complicity of the public, he is increasingly tempted
to ignore reality. From habit and laziness he reaches the point when he
himself is no longer able to tell where lies begin or end. There could never
be any question of calling him a liar because his art consists in lying. He
is just no longer in control of his art. He is its dupe, and hence he is held
back from any further conquest of reality.
From Citizen Kane to Farrebique
Recent years have brought a noticeable evolution of the aesthetic of
cinema in the direction of realism. The two most significant events in this
evolution in the history of the cinema since 1940 are Citizen Kane and
Paisa. Both mark a decisive step forward in the direction of realism but by
different paths. If I bring up the film of Orson Welles before I analyze the
27
What Js Cinema?
stylistics of the Italian film, it is because it will allow us to place the latter
in its true perspective. Orson Welles restored to cinematographic illusion
a fundamental quality of reality — its continuity. Classical editing, deriv-
ing from Griffith, separated reality into successive shots which were just
a series of either logical or subjective points of view of an event. A man
locked in a cell is waiting for the arrival of bis executioner. His anguished
eyes are on the door. At the moment the executioner is about to enter we
can be quite sure that the director will cut to a close shot of the door
handle as it slowly turns. This close-up is justified psychologically by the
victim's concentration on the symbol of his extreme distress. It is this or-
dering of the shots, this conventional analysis of the reality continuum,
that truly goes to make up the cinematographic language of the period.
The construction thus introduces an obviously abstract element into
reality. Because we are so used to such abstractions, we no longer sense
them. Orson Welles started a revolution by systematically employing a
depth of focus that had so far not been used. Whereas the camera lens,
classically, had focused successively on different parts of the scene, the
camera of Orson Welles takes in with equal sharpness the whole field of
vision contained simultaneously within the dramatic field. It is no longer
the editing that selects what we see, thus giving it an a priori significance, it
is the mind of the spectator which is forced to discern, as in a sort of
parallelepiped of reality with the screen as its cross-section, the dramatic
spectrum proper to the scene. It is therefore to an intelligent use of a
specific step forward that Citizen Kane owes its realism. Thanks to the
depth of focus of the lens, Orson Welles restored to reality its visible con-
tinuity.
We clearly see with what elements of reality the cinema has enriched
itself. But from other points of view, it is also evident that it has moved
away from reality or at least that it gets no nearer to it than does the
classical aesthetic. In ruling out, because of the complexity of his tech-
niques, all recourse to nature in the raw, natural settings,* exteriors, sun-
* Matters become complicated when we are dealing with urban settings.
Here the Italians are at an undoubted advantage. The Italian city, ancient or
modem, is prodigiously photogenic. From antiquity, Italian city planning has
28
An Aesthetic oj Reality
light, and nonprofessional actors, Orson Welles rejects those qualities of
the authentic document for which there is no substitute and which, being
likewise a part of reality, can themselves establish a form of realism. Let
us contrast Citizen Kane and Farrebique — in the latter, a systematic de-
termination to exclude everything that was not primarily natural material
is precisely the reason why Rouquier failed in the area of technical per-
fection.
Thus, the most realistic of the arts shares the common lot. It can-
not make reality entirely its own because reality must inevitably elude
it at some point. Undoubtedly an improved technique, skillfully applied,
may narrow the holes of the net, but one is compelled to choose between
one kind of reality and another. The sensitiveness resembles the sensitive-
ness of the retina. The nerve endings that register color and intensity of
light are not at all the same, the density of one being ordinarily in inverse
ratio to that of the other. Animals that have no difRculty in making out
the shape of their quarry in the dark are almost color blind.
Between the contrasting but equally pure kinds of realism represented
by Farrebique on the one hand and Citizen Kane on the other, there is
a wide variety of possible combinations. For the rest, the margin of loss
of the real, implicit in any realist choice, frequently allows the artist, by
the use of any aesthetic convention he may introduce into the area thus
left vacant, to increase the effectiveness of his chosen form of reality. In-
deed we have a remarkable example of this in the recent Italian cinema.
In the absence of technical equipment, the Italian directors have been
obliged to record the sound and dialogue after the actual filming. The net
remained theatrical and decorative. City life is a spectacle, a commedia dell'arte
that the Italians stage for their own pleasure. And even in the poorest quarters of
the town, the coral-like groupings of the houses, thanks to the terraces aad bal-
conies, offer outstanding possibilities for spectacle. The courtyard is an Eliza-
bethan set in which the show is seen from below, the spectators in the gallery
being the actors in the comedy. A poetic documentary was shown at Venice con-
sisting entirely of an assemblage of shots of courtyards. What more can you say
when the theatrical facades of the palazzi combine their operatic effects with the
stage-like architecture of the houses of the poor? Add to this the sunshine and the
absence of clouds (chief enemy of shooting on exteriors) and you have explained
why the urban exteriors of Italian films are superior to all others.
29
What Is Cinema?
result is a loss of realism. However, left free to use the camera unfettered
by the microphone, such directors have thereby profited by the occasion
to enlarge the camera *s field of action and its mobility with, consequently,
an immediate raising of the reality coefficient.
Future technical improvments which will permit the conquest of the
properties of the real (color and stereoscopy for example) can only in-
crease the distance between the two realist poles which today are situated
in the area surrounding Farrebique and Citizen Kane. The quality of the
interior shots will in fact increasingly depend on a complex, delicate and
cumbersome apparatus. Some measure of reality must always be sacrificed
in the effort of achieving it.
Paisa
How do you fit the Italian film mto the realist spectrum? After trying
to trace the geographical boundaries of this cinema, so penetrating in its
portrayal of the social setting, so meticulous and perceptive in its choice
of authentic and significant detail, it now remains for us to fathom its
aesthetic geology.
We would clearly be deluding ourselves if we pretended to reduce
recent Italian production to certain common, easily definable characteris-
tics applicable to all directors. We will simply try to smgle out those
characteristics with die widest application, reserving the right when the
occasion arises to limit our concern to the most significant films. Since we
must also make a choice, we wiJl arrange, by implication, the major
Italian films in concentric circles of decreasing interest around Faisa, since
it is this film of Rossellini's that yields the most aesthetic secrets.
Narrative Technique
As in the novel, the aesthetic implicit in the cinema reveals itself in its
narrative technique. A film is always presented as a succession of frag-
30
An Aesthetic of Reality
ments of imaged reality on a rectangular surface of given proportions, the
ordering of the images and their duration on the screen determining its
import.
The objective nature of the modem novel, by reducing the strictly
grammatical aspect of its stylistics to a minimum, has laid bare the secret
essence of style.* Certain qualities of the language of Faulkner, Heming-
way, or Malraux would certainly not come through in translation, but the
essential quality of their styles would not sufler because their style is almost
completely identical with their narrative technique — the ordering in time
of fragments of reality. The style becomes the inner dynamic principle of
the narrative, somewhat like the relation of energy to matter or the specific
physics of the work, as it were. This it is which distributes the fragmented
realities across the aesthetic spectrum of the narrative, which polarizes the
filings of the facts without changing their chemical composition. A Faulk-
ner, a Malraux, a Dos Passos, each has his personal universe which is
defined by the nature of the facts reported, but also by the law of gravity
which holds them suspended above chaos. It will be useful, tlierefore, to
arrive at a definition of the Italian style on the basis of the scenario, of its
genesis, and of the forms of exposition that it follows. Unfortunately the
demon of melodrama that Italian film makers seem incapable of exorcising
takes over every so often, thus imposing a dramatic necessity on strictly
foreseeable events. But that is another story. What matters is the creative
surge, the special way in which the situations are brought to life. The
necessity inherent in the narrative is biological rather than dramatic. It
burgeons and grows with all the verisimilitude of life.f One must not con-
* In Camus' VEiranger, for example, Sartre has clearly demonstrated the
link between the author's raetaphysic and the repeated use of the passe compose,
a tense of singular modal poverty.
t Nearly all the credits of an Italian film list under the heading "scenario" a
good dozen names. This imposing evidence of collaboration need not be taken
too seriously. It is intended to provide the producers with a naively political as-
surance. It usually consists of one Christian Democrat and one Communist (just
as in the film there is a Marxist and a priest); the third screenwriter has a reputa-
tion for story construction; the fourth is a gag man; the fifth because he is a good
dialogue writer; the sixth because he has a fine feeling for life. The result is no
better or no worse than if there had been 'only one screen writer, but the Italian
31
What Is Cinema?
dude that this method, on the face of it, is less aesthetic than a slow and
meticulous preplanning. But the old prejudice that time, money, and re-
sources have a value of their own is so rooted that people forget to relate
them to the work and to the artist. Van Gogh repainted the same picture
ten times, very quickly, while Cezanne would return to a painting time
and again over the years. Certain genres call for speed, for work done in
the heat of the moment, but surgery could not call for a greater sureness of
touch, for greater precision. It is only at this price that the Italian fikn
has that air of documentary, a naturakiess nearer to the spoken than to
the written account, to the sketch rather than to the painting. It calls for the
ease and sure eye of Rossellini, Lattuada, Vergano, and de Santis. In their
hands the camera is endowed with well-defined cinematographic tact, won-
derfully sentitive antennae which allow them with one stroke to get pre-
cisely what they are after. In // Bandito, the prisoner, reluming from Ger-
many, finds his house m ruins. Where a solid building once stood there is
now just a pile of stones surrounded by broken-down walls. The camera
shows us the man*s face. Then, following the movement of his eyes, it
travels through a 360-degree turn which gives us the whole spectacle. This
panning shot is doubly original. First, because at the outset, we stand off
from the actor since we are looking at him by way of a camera trick, but
during the traveling shot we become identified with him to the point of
feeling surprised when, the 360-degree pan having been completed, we
return to his face with its expression of utter horror. Second, because the
speed of this subjective panning shot varies. It starts with a long slide, then
it comes almost to a halt, slowly studies the burned and shattered walls
with the same rhythm of the man's watching eye, as if directly impelled by
his concentration.
I have had to dwell at some length on this minor example to avoid
making a purely abstract affirmation concerning what I regard, in an al-
most psychological sense of the word, as cinematic "tact." A shot of this
notion of a scenario fits in with their concept of a collective paternity according
to which everyone contributes an idea without any obligation on the part of the
director to use it. Rather than the assembly line of American screenwriters, this
interdependence of improvisation is like that of com media dttVarte or jazz,
32
An Aesthetic oj Reality
kind by virtue of its dyoamism belongs with the movement of a hand
drawing a sketch, leaving a space here, filling in there, here sketching
round the subject, and there bringing it into relief. I am thinking of the
slow motion in the documentary on Matisse which allows us to observe,
beneath the continuous and uniform arabesques of the stroke, the varying
hesitations of the artist's hand. In such a case the camera movement is
important. The camera must be equally as ready to move as to remain
still. Traveling and panning shots do not have the same god-like character
that the Hollywood camera crane has bestowed on them. Everything is
shot from eye-level or from a concrete point of view, such as a roof top or
window. Technically speaking, all the memorable poetry oi the children's
ride on the white horse in Sciuscia can be attributed to a low-level camera
angle which gives the riders on their mounts the appearance of an eques-
trian statue. In Sortilege, Christian Jacques went to a great deal more
trouble over his phantom horse. But all that cinematic virtuosity did not
prevent his animal from having the prosaic look of a broken-down cab
horse. The Italian camera retains something of the human quality of the
Bell and Howell newsreel camera, a projection of hand and eye, almost a
living part of the operator, instantly ui tune with his awareness.
As for the photography, the lighting plays only a minor expressive
role. First, because lighting calls for a studio, and the greater part of the
filming is done on exteriors or in real-life settings. Second, because docu-
mentary camera work is identified in our minds with the grey tones of
newsreels. It would be a contradiction to take any great pains with or to
touch up excessively the plastic quality of the style.
As we have thus far attempted to describe it, the style of Italian films
would appear to belong with a greater or less degree of skill and mastery
of technique or feeling to the same family as quasi-literary journalism, to
an ingenious art, pleasing, lively, and even moving, but basically a minor
art. This is sometimes true even though one may actually rank the genre
fairly high in the aesthetic hierarchy. It would be unjust and untrue to see
such an assessment as the final measure of this particular technique. Just
as, in literature, reportage with its ethic of objectivity (perhaps it would
be more correct to say with its ethic of seeming objectivity) has simply
33
What Is Cinema?
provided a basis for a new aesthetic of the novel, so the technique of the
Italian fihn makers results in the best films especially in Paisd, with its
aesthetic of narrative that is both complex and original,*
Paisa is unquestionably the first film to resemble closely a collection of
short stories. Up to now we had only known the film composed of sketches
— a bastard and phony type of film if ever there was one, Rossellini tells us,
in succession, six stories of the Italian Liberation. This historical element
is the only thing they have in common. Three of them, tlie first, the
fourth, and the last, are taken from the Resistance, The others are droll
or pathetic or tragic episodes occurring on the fringes of the Allied ad-
vance. Prostitution, the black market, and a Franciscan convent alike
provide the story material. There is no progression other than a chrono-
logical ordering of the story begirming with the landing of an Allied force
in Sicily. But their social, historical, and human foundation gives them a
unity enough to constitute a collection perfectly homogeneous in its diver-
sity. Above all, the length of each stor\', its form, contents, and aesthetic
duration gives us for the first time precisely the impression of a short story.
The Naples episode of the urchin — a black-market expert, selling the
clothes of a drunk Negro soldier — is an excellent Saroyan story. Another
makes us think of Hemingway, yet another (the first) of Faulkner. I am
not merely referring to the tone or the subject, but in a profound way to
the style. Unfortunately one cannot put a film sequence in quotation
marks like a paragraph, and hence any literary description of one must
of necessity be incomplete. However, here is an episode from the final
story which reminds me now of Hemingway, now of Faulkner :
1. A small group of Italian partisans and Allied soldiers have been
given a supply of food by a family of fisher folk living in an isolated farm-
house in the heart of the marshlands of the Po deha. Having been handed
I will not at this point get into an historical argument over the origins or
the foreshadowing of the "novel of reportage" in the nineteenth century. Besides,
the novels of Stendhal or the naturalists were concerned with frankness, acute-
ness, and perspicacity of observation, rather than with objectivity properly so
called. Facts for their own sake had not yet acquired that kind of ontological
autonomy, which makes of them a succession of sealed off monads, strictly
limited by their appearance.
34
An Aesthetic of Reality
a basket of eels, they take off. Some while later, a German patrol discovers
this, and executes the inhabitants of the farin. 2. An American officer and
a partisan are wandering at twilight in the marshes. There is a burst of
gunfire in the distance. From a highly elliptical conversation we gather
that the Germans have shot the fishermen. 3. The dead bodies of the men
and women lie stretched out in front of the little farmhouse. In the twi-
light, a half -naked baby cries endlessly.
Even with such a succinct description, this fragment of the story re-
veals enormous ellipses — or rather, great holes. A complex train of action
is reduced to three or four brief fragments, in themselves already elliptical
enough in comparison with the reality they are unfolding. Let us pass
over the first purely descriptive fragment. The second event is conveyed
to us by something only the partisans can know — distant gunfire. The
third is presented to us independently of the presence of the partisans. It
is not even certain that there were any witnesses to the scene. A baby
cries besides its dead parents. There is a fact. How did the Germans dis-
cover that the parents were guilty? How is it that the child is still alive?
That is not the film's concern, and yet a whole train of connected events
led to this particular outcome. In any case, the fihn maker does not ordi-
narily show us everything. That is impossible — but the things he selects
and the things he leaves out tend to form a logical pattern by way of which
the mind passes easily from cause to effect. The technique of Rossellini
undoubtedly maintains an intelligible succession of events, but these do
not mesh like a chain with the sprockets of a wheel. The mind has to leap
from one event to the other as one leaps from stone to stone in crossing a
river. It may happen that one's foot hesitates between two rocks, or that
one misses one's footing and slips. The mind does likewise. Actually it is
not of the essence of a stone to aUow people to cross rivers without wetting
their feet any more than the divisions of a melon exist to allow the head
of the family to divide it equally. Facts are facts, our imagination makes
use of them, but they do not exist inherently for this purpose. In the usual
shooting script (according to a process resembling the classical novel
form) the fact comes under the scrutiny of the camera, is divided up,
analyzed, and put together again, undoubtedly without entirely losing its
What Is Cinema?
factual nature; but the latter, presumably, is enveloped in abstraction,
as the day of a brick is enveloped by the wail which is not as yet present
but which will multiply its parallelipeds. For Rossellini, facts take on a
meaning, but not like a tool whose function has predetermined its form. The
facts follow one another, and the mind is forced to observe their resem-
blance; and thus, by recalling one another, they end by meaning some-
thing which was inherent in each and which is, so to speak, the moral of
the story — a moral the mind cannot fail to grasp since it was drawn from
reality itself. In the Florentine episode, a woman crosses the city while
it is still occupied by a number of Germans and groups of Italian Fas-
cists; she is on her way to meet her fiance, a leader of the Italian under-
ground, accompanied by a man who likewise is looking for his wife and
child. The attention of the camera following them, step by step, though
it will share all the difficulties they encounter, all their dangers, will how-
ever be impartially divided between the heroes of the adventure and the
conditions they must encounter. Actually, everything that is happening
in a Florence in the throes of the Liberation is of a like importance. The
personal adventures of the two individuals blend into the mass of other ad-
ventures, just as one attempts to elbow one's way into a crowd to recover
something one has lost. In the course of making one's way one sees in
the eyes of those who stand aside the reflections of other concerns, other
passions, other dangers alongside which one's own may well be merely
laughable. Ultimately and by chance, the woman learns, from a wounded
partisan, that the man she is looking for is dead. But the statement from
which she learned the news was not aimed straight at her — but hit her
like a stray bullet. The impeccable line followed by this recital owes nothing
to classical forms that are standard for a story of this kind Attention is
never artificially focused on the heroine. The camera makes no pretense at
being psychologically subjective . We share all the more fully in the feelings
of the protagonists because it is easy for us to sense what they are feeling;
and also because the pathetic aspect of the episode does not derive from
the fact that a woman has lost the man she loves but from the special place
this drama holds among a thousand others, apart from and yet also part of
the complete drama of the Liberation of Florence. The camera, as if
36
An Aesthetic of Reality
making an impartial report, confines itself to following a woman searching
for a man, leaving to us the task of being alone with her, of understanding
her, and of sharing her suffering.
In the admirable final episode of the partisans surrounded in the
marshlands, the muddy waters of the Po Delta, the reeds stretching away
to the horizon, just sufficiently tall to hide the man crouching down in the
little flat-bottomed boat, the lapping of the waves against the wood, aU
occupy a place of equal importance with the men. This dramatic role
played by the marsh is due in great measure to deliberately intended quali-
ties in the photography. This is why the horizon is always at the same
height. Maintaining the same proportions between water and sky in every
shot brings out one of the basic characteristics of this landscape. It is the
exact equivalent, under conditions imposed by the screen, of the inner
feeling men experience who are living between the sky and the water and
whose lives are at the mercy of an infinitesimal shift of angle in relation to
the horizon. This shows how much subtlety of expression can be got on ex-
teriors from a camera in the hands of the man who photographed Paisa.
The unit of cinematic narrative in Paisa is not tlie "shot," an abstract
view of a reality which is being analyzed, but the "fact." A fragment of
concrete reality in itself multiple and full of ambiguity, whose meaning
emerges only after the fact, thanks to other imposed facts between which
the mind establishes certain relationships. Unquestionably, the director
chose these "facts" carefully while at the same time respecting their factual
integrity. The closeup of the door knob referred to earlier was less a fact
than a sign brought into arbitrary relief by the camera, and no more in-
dependent semantically than a preposition in a sentence. The opposite
is true of the marsh or the death of the peasants.
But the nature of the "image facts" is not only to maintain with the
other image facts the relationships invented by the mind. These are in a
sense the centrifugal properties of die images — those which make the
narrative possible. Each image being on its own just a fragment of reality
existing before any meanings, the entire surface of the scene should mani-
fest an equaUy concrete density. Once again we have here the opposite
of the "door-knob" type of scene, in which the color of the enamel, the
37
What Is Cinema?
dirt marks at the level of the hand, the shine of the metal, the worn- away
look are just so many useless facts, concrete parasites of an abstraction
fittingly dispensed with.
In Paisa (and I repeat that I imply by this, in varying degrees, all
Italian films) the closeup of the door knob would be replaced, without any
loss of that peculiar quality of which it is part, by the "image fact" of a
door whose concrete characteristics would be equally visible. For the same
reason the actors will take care never to dissociate their performance from
the decor or from the performance of their fellow actors, Man himself is
just one fact among others, to whom no pride of place should be given a
priori. That is why the Italian film makers alone know how to shoot suc-
cessful scenes in buses, trucks, or trains, namely because these scenes com-
bine to create a special density within the framework of which they know
how to portray an action without separating it from its material context
and without loss of that uniquely human quality of which it is an integral
part. The subtlety and suppleness of movement within these cluttered
spaces, the naturalness of the behavior of everyone in the shooting area,
make of these scenes supreme bravura moments of the Italian cinema.
The Realism of the Italian Cinema
and the Technique of the American Novel
The absence of any film documentation may have operated against a
clear understanding of what I have so far written. I have arrived at the
point of characterizing as similar the styles of Rossellini in Paisa and of
Orson Welles in Citizen Kane. By diametrically opposite technical routes
each arrives at a scenario with roughly the same approach to reality — the
depth of focus of Welles and the predisposition toward reality of Rossellini.
In both we find the same dependence of the actor relative to the setting,
the same realistic acting demanded of everyone in the scene whatever
their dramatic importance. Better still, although the styles arc so different,
38
An Aesthetic of Reality
the narrative follows basically the same pattern in Citizen Kane and in
Paisa.
In short, although they use independent techniques, without the least
possibility of a direct influence one on the other, and possessed of tempera-
ments that could hardly be less compatible, Rossellini and Welles have, to
all intents and purposes, the same basic aesthetic objective, the same aes-
thetic concept of realism.
I had leisure enough as I watched the film to compare the narrative of
Paisd with that of some modem novelists and short story writers. Besides,
the resemblances between the technique of Orson Welles and that of the
American novel, notably Dos Passes, are sufficiently obvious to allow
me now to expound my thesis. The aesthetic of the Italian cinema, at least
in its most elaborate manifestations and in the work of a director as con-
scious of his medium as Rossellini, is simply the equivalent on film of the
American novel.
Let us clearly understand that we are here concerned with somethbg
quite other than banal adaptation, Hollywood^ in fact, never stops adapting
American novels for the screen. We are familiar with what Sam Wood did
to For WhotH the Bell Tolls. Basically all he wanted was to retell a plot.
Even if he had been faithful to the original, sentence by sentence, he
would not, properly speaking, have transferred anything from the book to
the screen. The films that have managed to translate something of the
style of novels into images can be counted on the fingers of one hand, by
which I mean the very fabric of the narrative, the law of gravity that
governs the ordering of the facts, in Faulkner, Hemingway, and Dos
Passos. We had to wait for Orson Welles to show what the cinema of the
American novel would be.*
So then, while Hollywood adapts bestseller after bestseller at the same
* The cinema nevertheless has come close to these truths on several occasions,
m the case of Feuillade for example, or of Stroheim. More recently, Malraux has
clearly understood the parallel between a certain style of novel and film narrative.
Finally, instinctively and by virtue of his genius, Renoir had already applied in
La Regie du je'ti the essentials of the principles of depth of focus and the simul-
taneous presentation of all the actors in a scene. He had explained this in a
prophetic article in 1938 in the review Point,
39
What Is Cinema?
time moving further away from the spirit of this literature, it is in Italy,
naturally and with an ease that excludes any notion of deliberate and
willful imitation, that the cinema of American literature has become a
reality. Unquestionably we must not underestimate the popularity of the
American novelists in Italy, where their works were translated and as-
similated long before they were in France, and the influence for example
of Saroyan on Vitiorini is common knowledge. I would sooner cite, in
preference to these dubious cause-and-effect relations, the exceptional
affinity of the two civilizations as revealed by the Allied occupation. The
G.I. felt himself at home at once in Italy, and the paisan was at once on
familiar terms with the G J., black or white. The widespread black market
and the presence everywhere of prostitution, wherever the American
army went, is by no means the least convincing example of the symbiosis
of two civilizations. It is not for nothing that American soldiers are im-
portant characters in most recent Italian films; and that they are much
at home there speaks volumes.
Although some paths have been opened by literature and the occupa-
tion, the phenomenon cannot be explained on this level alone. American
films are being made in Italy today but never has the Italian film been at
the same time more typically Italian, The body of references I have adopted
has excluded similarities even less disputable, for example the Italian
"tale," the commedia dell'arte and the technique of the fresco. Rather than
an influence one on the other, it is an accord between cmema and literature,
based on the same profound aesthetic data, on the same concept of the rela-
tion between art and reality. It is a long while since the modem novel
created its realist revolution, since it combined behavorism, a reporter's
technique, and the ethic of violence. Far from the cinema having the slight-
est effect on this evolution, as is commonly held today, a film like Faisa
proves that the cinema was twenty years behind the contemporary novel
It is not the least of the merits of the Italian cinema that it has been able
to find the truly cinematic equivalent for the most important literary revo-
lution of our time.
40
LA TERRA TREMA
THE SUBJECT MATTER of La Terra Trema owes nothing to the war: it
deals with an attempted revolt by the fishermen of a small Sicilian village
against the economic straagkhold exerted by the local fleet-owning fish
merchants, I might define it as a kind of snpei-Farrebique about fisher-
men. The parallels with Rouquier's film are many: first, its quasidocu-
mentary realism; then (if one may so put it) the exoticism intrinsic to
die subject matter; and, too, the underlying "human geography" (for the
Sicilian family, the hope of freeing themselves from the merchants amounts
to the same thing as the installation of electricity for the Farrebique fam-
ily). Although in La Terra Trema, a Communist fihn, the whole village
is involved, the story is told in terms of a single faniily, ranging from grand-
father to grandchildren. This famUy was as much out of its element in the
sumptuous reception Universalia gave in its honor at the Excelsior in
Venice as the Farrebique family had been at its press party in Paris.
Visconii, like Rouquier, did not want to use professional actors, not even
RosselJini's kind of "amalgam." His fishermen are fishermen in real life.
He recruited them on the scene of his story's action — if that is the proper
term here, for here (as in Farrebique) the action deliberately resists the
seductions of "drama": the story unfolds" without regard for the rules of
suspense, its only resources a concern with things themselves, as in life. But
with these negative rather than positive aspects of the story the resem-
41
What Is Cinema?
blances to Farrebique end; La Terra Trema is as remote as could be in
style from Farrebique.
Viscoriti, like R3uquier, aimed at and unquestionably achieved a
paradoxical synthesis of realism and aestheticism but the poetry of Farre-
bique is due, in essence, to montage — for example, the winter and spring
sequences. To obtain this synthesis in his film, Visconti has not had re-
course to the effects one can produce from the juxtaposition of images.
Each image here contains a meaning of its own which it expresses fully.
This is the reason why it is difficult to see more than a tenuous relation
between La Terra Trema and the Soviet cinema of the second half of the
twenties, to which montage was essential. We may add now that it is
not by means of symbolism in the imagery either that meaning manifests
itself here — I mean, the symbolism to which Eisenstein and Rouquier re-
sort. The aesthetic peculiar to the image here is always plastic; it avoids
any inclination to the epic. As staggeringly beautiful as the fishing fleet
may be when it leaves the harbor, it is still just the village fleet, not, as in
Potemkin, the Enthusiasm and the Support of the people of Odessa who
send out the fishing boats loaded with food for the rebels.
But, one may ask, where is art to take refuge if the realism one is
proposing is so ascetic? Everywhere else. In the quality of the photogra-
phy, especially. Our compatriot Aide, who before his work on this film did
nothing of real note and was known only as a studio cameraman, has
here created a profoundly original style of image, unequaled anywhere
(as far as I know) but in the short films which are being made in Sweden
by Ame Sucksdorff .
To keep my explanations brief, I will only note that, in an article on
Italian film of 1946, "Le realisme cinematographique et I'ecole italienne
de la liberation" (Esprit, January, 1948), I had examined some aspects
of the kind of film realism then current, and that I was led to see Farrebique
and Citizen Kane as the two poles of realistic technique. The realism of
Farrebique derives from the object itself, of Citizen Kane from the way
it structures what it represents. In Farrebique everything is real. In Kane
everythmg has been reconstructed in a studio — but only because such
depth of field and such rigorously composed images could not be obtained
42
La Terra Trema
on location. Paisa stands somewhere between the two but closer to
Farrebique for its images, while the realistic aesthetic works it way into
the film between the component blocs of reality through its peculiar con-
ception of narrative.
The images of La Terra Trema achieve what is at once a paradox and
tour de force in integrating the aesthetic realism of Ciiizen Kane with the
documentary realism of Farrebique. If this is not, strictly speaking, the
first time depth of focus has been used outside the studio, it is at least the
first time it has been used as consciously and as systematically as it is here
out of doors, in the rain and even in the dead of night, as well as indoors
in the real-life settings of the fishermen's homes. I cannot linger over the
technical tour de force which this represents, but I would like to empha-
size that depth ol focus has naturally led Visconti ( as it led Welles) not only
to reject montage but, in some literal sense, to invent a new kind of shoot-
ing script.* His "shots" (if one is justified in retaining the term) are un-
usually long — some lasting three or four minutes. In each, as one might
expect, several actions are going on simultaneously. Visconti also seems
to have wanted, in some systematic sense, to base the construction of his
image on the event itself. If a fisherman rolls a cigarette, he spares us
nothing: we see the whole operation; it will not be reduced to its dramatic
or symbolic meaning, as is usual with montage. The shots are often fixed-
frame, so people and things may enter the frame and take up position; but
Visconti is also in the habit of using a special kind of panning shot which
moves very slowly over a very wide arc: this is the only camera move-
ment which he allows himself, for he excludes all tracking shots and, of
course, every unusual camera angle.
The unlikely sobriety of this structure is possible only because of the
remarkable plastic balance maintained — a balance which only a photo-
graph could absolutely render here. But above and beyond the merits of
its purely formal properties, the image reveals an intimate knowledge of
the subject matter on the part of the film makers. This is especially re-
* For a note on Bazin's use of technical terms, see p. 181.
43
markable in the interiors, which hitherto have eluded film. The difficulties
attendant on lighting and shooting make it almost impossible to use real
interiors as settings. II has been done occasionaUy, but the results from an
aesthetic point of view have been far inferior to what can be achieved on
exteriors. Here, for the first time throughout an entire film there was no
variation in quality between interior and exterior as to the style of the
shooting script, the performance of the actors, and the results of the
photography. Viscotiti is worthy of the novelty of his triumph. Despite
the poverty — or even b^Ciiuse of the simple "ordinariness" of this house-
hold of fishermen, an extraordinary kind of poetry, at once intimate and
social, emanates from it.
The masterly way in which Visconti has handled his actors deserves
the highest praise. This is by no means the first time in history of film that
nonprofessional actors have been used, but never before (except perhaps
in "exotic" films, where the problem is somewhai specialized) have the
actors been so skillfully integrated with the most specifically aesthetic
elements of the film. Rouquier never knew how to handle his family with-
out our being conscious of a camera. The embarrassment, the repressed
laughter, the awkwardness are skillfully covered up by the editing which
always cuts just in the nick of time. Tn La Terra Trema, the actor, some-
times on camera for several minutes at a time, speaks, moves, and acts
with complete naturalness — one might even say, with unimaginable grace.
Visconri is from the theater. He has known how to communicate to the
nonprofessionals of La Terra Trema something more than naturalness,
namely that stylization of gesture that is the crowning achievement of an
actor's profession. If festival juries were not what they are, the Venice
festival prize for best acting should have gone to the fishermen of La
Terra Trema.
Visconti lets us sees that the Italian neorealism of 1946 has been left
far behind on more than one score. Hierarchies in art are fairly pointless,
but cinema is too young an art still, too involved in its own evolution to be
able to indulge in repeatmg itself for any length of time. Five years in
cinema is the equivalent of an entire literary generation. It is the merit
of Visconti to have managed a dialectical integration of the achievements
44
La Terra Trema
of recent Italian film with a larger, richer aesthetic for which the term
"realism" has not too much meaning now. I am not saying that La Terra
Trema is superior to Pcusa or to La Caccia tragica but only that it does, at
least, have the merit of having left them behind from an historical stand-
point. Seeing the best Italian films of 1948, I had the impression that
Italian cinema was doomed to repeat itself to its utter exhaustion.
La Terra Trema is the only original way out of the aesthetic impasse,
and in that sense, one might suppose, it bears the burden of our hopes.
Does this mean that those hopes will be fulfilled? No, unhappily, it
is not certain, for La Terra Trema runs counter, still, to some filmic prin-
ciples with which Visconti will have in future films to deal somewhat more
convincingly than he does here. In particular, his disinclination to sacri-
fice anything to drama has one obvious and serious consequence: La Terra
Trema bores the public. A film with a limited action, it lasts longer than
three hours. If you add that the language used in the film is a dia-
lectal Sicilian (which, given the photographic style of the image, it is im-
possible to subtitle), and that not even Italians understand it, you can see
that this is somewhat austere "entertainment" and faces no more than a
restricted commercial future. I am sincere when I say that I hope Uni-
versalia will play the Maecenas sufficiently to enable Visconti, while him-
self sharing the cost from his large personal fortune, to finish the trilogy
he projects of which La Terra Trema is only the first part. We will then,
at best, have some filmic monster, whose highly social and political
preoccupations will nonetheless remain inaccessible to the general public.
In the world of cinema, it is not necessary that everyone approve every
film, provided that what prompts the public's incomprehension can be
compensated for by the other things. In other words, the aesthetic of La
Terra Trema must be applicable to dramatic ends if it is to be of service
in the evolution of cinema.
One has to take into account too — and this is even more disturbing, in
view of what one has the right to expect from Visconti himself — a dan-
gerous inclination to aestheticism. This great aristocrat, an artist to the
tips of his fingers, is a Communist, too — do I dare say a synthetic one?
La Terra Trema lacks irmer fire. One is reminded of the great Re-
45
What Is Cinema?
naissance painters who, without having to do violence to themselves, were
able to paint such fine religious frescoes in spite of their deep indifference
to Christinianity, I am not passing judgment on the sincerity of Visconti's
communism. But what is sincerity? Obviously, at issue is not some pa-
ternalistic feeling for the proletariat. Paternalism is a bourgeois phenome-
non, and Visconti is an aristocrat. What is at issue is, maybe, an aesthetic
participation in history. Whatever it be, though, we are a long way off
from the telling conviction of Poiemkin or The End of Saint Petersburg or
even (the theme is even the same) of Piscator. There is no doubt that the
film does have propaganda value, but this value is purely objective : there
is no moving eloquence to bolster its documentary vigor. This is how
Visconti intended it to he. This decision is not in itself unattractive. But
it involves him in a fairly risky bet, which he may not necessarily be able
to cover, at least in terms of film. Let us hope that his future work will
show us that it can. As it stands, however, it wUl not, unless it can
avoid falling in the direction in which it is already leaning perilously.
46
BICYCLE THIEF
WHAT SEEMS to me most astonishing about the Italian cinema is that it
appears to feel it should escape from the aesthetic impasse to which neo-
realism is said to have led. The dazzling effects of 1946 and 1947 having
faded away, one could reasonably fear that this useful and intelligent re-
action against the Italian aesthetic of the superspectacle and, for that
matter, more generally, against the technical aestheticism from which
cinema suffered aU over the world, would never get beyond an interest
in a kind of superdocumentary, or romanticized reportage. One began
to realize that the success of Roma Cittd Aperta, Paisa, or Sciuscia was
inseparable from a special conjunction of historical ckcumstances that
took its meaning from the Liberation, and that the technique of the films
was in some way magnified by the revolutionary value of the subject. Just
as some books by Malraux or Hemingway find in a crystallization of
journalistic style the best narrative form for a tragedy of current events,
so the films of RosseUini or De Sica owed the fact that they were major
works, masterpieces, simply to a fortuitous combination of form and
subject matter. But when the novelty and above all the flavor of their
technical crudity have exhausted their surprise effect, what remains of
Italian "neorealism" when by force of circumstances it must revert
to traditional subjects: crime stories, psychological dramas, social cus-
toms? The camera in the street we can still accept, but doesn't that ad-
47
What Is Cinema?
mkable nonprofessional acting stand self-coodenmed in proportion as
its discxjveries swell the ranks of international stars? And, by way of gen-
eralizing about this aesthetic pessimism: "realism" can only occupy in art
a dialectica] position — it is more a reaction than a truth. It remains then
to make it part of the aesthetic it came into existence to verify. In any case,
the Italians were not the last to downgrade their "neorealism." I think
there is not a single Italian director, including the most neorealist, who
does not insist that they must get away from it.
French critics too feel themselves a prey to scruples — especially since
this vaunted neorealism early showed signs of running out of steam. Come-
dies, agreeable enough in themselves, appeared on the scene to exploit
with visible ease the formula of Qmttro passi fra le nuvole or Vivere in
Pace. But worst of all was the emergence of a neorealist superspectacle
in which the search for real settings, action taken from everyday life, por-
trayals of lower-class mileux, "social" backgrounds, became an academic
stereotype far more detestable than the elephants of Sdpio Africmus. For
a neorealist film may have every defect except that of being academic.
Thus at Venice // Patto col diavolo by Luigi Chiarini, a somber melo-
drama of rural love, took visible pains to find a contemporary alibi in a
story of conflict between shepherds and woodsmen. Although well done
on some accounts, In nome della legge, which the Italians tried to push to
the fore at Knokke-le-Zo ute, cannot escape similar criticisms. One will
notice incidentally, from these two examples, that neorealism is now pre-
occupied with rural problems, perhaps prudently in view of the fate of ur-
ban neorealism. The closed-in countryside has replaced the open city.
However that may be, the hopes that we placed in the new Italian
school had started to turn into uneasiness, or even skepticism, all the more
since the aesthetic of neorealism forbids it to repeat itself or plagiarize
itself in the way that is possible and even normal in some traditional genres
(the crime film, the western, the atmospheric film, and so on). Already
we were beginning to look toward England whose recent cinematic rebirth
is likewise, in part, the fruit of realism; that of the school of documen-
tarists who, before and during the war, had gone deeply into the resources
offered by social and technical realities. A film like Brief Encounter would
48
Bicycle Thiej
probably have been impossible without the ten years of preparation by
Grierson, Cavalcanti, or Rotha. But the English, instead of breaking with
the technique and the history of European and American cinema, have
succeeded in combining a highly refined aestheticism with the advances
of a certain realism. Nothing could be more tightly structured, more care-
fully prepared, than Brief Encounter — nothing less conceivable without
the most up-to-date studio resources, without clever and established ac-
tors; yet can we imagine a more realistic portrait of English manners and
psychology? Certainly, David Lean has gained nothing by making over,
this year, a kind of second Briej Encounter: The Pasnonate Friends, pre-
sented at the Cannes festival. But it is against repetition of the subject
matter that one can reasonably protest, not against the repetition of the
techniques, which could be used over and over indefinitely.*
Have I played devil's advocate long enough? For let me now make
a confession: my doubts about the Italian cinema have never gone so far,
but all the arguments I have invoked have been used by intelligent men — •
especially in Italy — nor are they unfortunately without some semblance of
validity. They have also often troubled me, and I subscribe to some of
them.
On the other hand there is a film called Ladri di Biciclette and tv^o
other films that I hope we will soon get to know in France. With Ladri di
Biciclette De Sica has managed to escape from the impasse, to reaffirm
anew the entire aesthetic of neorealism.
Ladri di Biciclette certainly is neorealist, by all the principles one can
deduce from the best Italian films since 1946, The story is from the lower
classes, almost populist: an incident in the daily life of a worker. But the
film shows no extraordinary events such as those which befall the fated
workers in Gabin films. There are no crimes of passion, none of those
* This paragraph, which redounds to the glory of the Enghsh cinema but not
that of the writer, has been retained to bear witness to critical illusions about
English cinema which I was not the only one to entertain. Brief Encounier made
aJmost as great an impression as Roma Citta Aperta. Time has shown which of
the two had a real cinematic future. Besides, the Noel Coward-David Lean filrn
owed very ]itile to the Grierson school of documentary. [Note by Bazin some
iinne after the article was written, probably in 1956. — TR.]
49
grandiose coincidences common in detective stories which simply trans-
fer to a reahn of proletarian exoticism the great tragic debates once re-
served for the dwellers on Olympus. Truly an insignificant, even a banal
incident; a workman spends a whole day looking in vain in the streets
of Rome for the bicycle someone has stolen from him. This bicycle has
been the tool of his trade, and if he doesn't find it he will again be unem-
ployed. Late in the day, after hours of fruitless wandering, he too tries to
steal a bicycle. Apprehended and then released, he is as poor as ever, but
now he feels the shame of having sunk to the level of the thief.
Plainly there is not enough material here even for a news item: the
whole story would not deserve two lines in a stray-dog column. One must
take care not to confuse it with realist tragedy in the Prevert or James
Cain manner, where the initial news item is a diabolic trap placed by the
gods amid the cobble stones of the street. In itself the event contains no
proper dramatic valence. It takes on meaning only because of the social
(and not psychological or aesthetic) position of the victim. Without the
haunting specter of unemployment, which places the event in the Italian
society of 1948, it would be an utterly banal misadventure. Likewise, the
choice of a bicycle as the key object in the drama is characteristic both of
Italian urban life and of a period when mechanical means of transporta-
tion were still rare and expensive. There is no need to insist on the hun-
dreds of other meaningful details that multiply the vital links between
the scenario and actuality, situating the event in political and social his-
tory, in a given place at a given time.
The techniques employed in the mise en scene likewise meet the most
exacting specifications of Italian neorealism. Not one scene shot in a studio.
Everything was filmed in the streets. As for the actors, none had the slight-
est experience in theater or film. The workman came from the Breda fac-
tory, the child was found hanging around in the street, the wife was a
journalist.
These then are the facts of the case. It is clear that they do not appear
to recall in any sense the neorealism of Quattro passi jra le mvole, Vivere
in Pace, or Sciuscia. On the face of it then one should have special reasons
for being wary. The sordid side of the tale tends toward that most de-
50
Bicycle Thief
batable aspect of Italian stories; indulgence in the wretched, a systematic
search for squalid detail
If Ladri di Biciclette is a true masterpiece, comparable in rigor to
Paisa it is for certain precise reasons, none of which emerge either from
a simple outline of the scenario or from a superficial disquisition on the
technique of the mise en scene.
The scenario is diabolically clever in its construction; beginning with
the alibi of a current event it makes good use of a number of systems of
dramatic coordinates radiating in all directions. Ladri di Biciclette is cer-
tainly the only valid Communist fihn of the whole past decade precisely
because it still has meaning even when you have abstracted its social sig-
nificance. Its social message is not detached, it remains immanent in the
event, but it is so clear that nobody can overlook it, still less take excep-
tion to it, since it is never made explicitly a message. The thesis implied
is wondrously and outrageously simple; in the world where this workman
lives, the poor must steal from each other in order to survive. But this
thesis is never stated as such, it is just that events are so linked together
that they have the appearance of a formal truth while retaining an anec-
dotal quality. Basically, the workman might have found his bicycle in the
middle of the film; only then there would have been no film. (Sorry to have
bothered you, the director might say; we really did think he would never
find it, but since he has, all is well, good for him, the performance is over,
you can turn up the lights.)/ In other words, a propaganda film would
try to prove that the workman could not find his bicycle, and that he is
inevitably trapped in the vicious circle of poverty. De Sica limits himself to
showing that the workman cannot find his bicycle and that as a result he
doubtless will be unemployed agam. No one can fail to see that it is the
accidental nature of the script that gives the thesis its quality of necessity;
the slightest doubt cas.ion the necessity of the events in the scenario of a
propaganda film renders the argument hypothetical.
Although on the basis of the workman's misfortune we have no al-
ternative but to condemn a certain kind of relation between a man and his
work, the film never makes the events or the people part of an economic
or political Manicheism. It takes care not to cheat on reality, not only by
51
What Is Cinema?
contriving to give the succession of events the appearance of an accidental
and as it were anecdotal chronology but in treating each of them accord-
ing to its phenomenological integrity. In the middle of the chase the little
boy suddenly needs to piss. So he does. A downpour forces the father and
son to shelter in a carriageway, so like them we have to forego the chase
and wait till the storm is over. The events are not necessarily signs of some-
thing, of a truth of which we are to be convinced, they all carry their own
weight, their complete uniqueness, that ambiguity that characterizes any
fact. So, if you do not have the eyes to see, you are free to attribute what
happens to bad luck or to chance. The same applies to the people in the
film. The worker is just as deprived and isolated among his fellow trade
unionists as he is walking along the street or even in that ineffable scene of
the Catholic "Quakers" into whose company he will shortly stray, because
the trade union does not exist to find lost bikes but to transform a world
in which losing his bike condemns a man to poverty. Nor does the worker
come to lodge a complaint with the trade union but to find comrades who
will be able to help him discover the stolen object. So here you have a
collection of proletarian members of a union who behave no differently
from a group of paternalistic bourgeois toward an unfortun?ite workman.
In his private misfortune, the poster hanger is just as alone in his union
as in church (buddies apart that is — but then who your buddies are is your
own affair). But this parallel is extremely useful because it points up a
striking contrast. The indifference of the trade union is normal and justi-
fied because a trade union is striving for justice not for charity. But the
cumbersome paternalism of the Catholic "Quakers" is unbearable, be-
cause their eyes are closed to his personal tragedy while they in fact actually
do nothing to change the world that is the cause of it. On this score the
most successful scene is that in the storm under the porch when a flock of
Austrian seminarians crowd around the worker and his son. We have no
valid reason to blame them for chattering so much and still less for talking
German. But it would be difficult to create a more objectively anticlerical
scene.
Clearly, and I could find twenty more examples : events and people are
never introduced in support of a social thesis — but the thesis emerges fully
52
Bicycle Thiej
armed and all the more irrefutable because il is presented to us as some-
thing thrown in into the bargain. It is our intelligence that discerns and
shapes it, not the film. De Sica wins every play on the board without ever
having made a bet.
This technique is not entirely new in Italian films and we have else-
where stressed its value at length both apropos of Paisa and of Allemania
Anno Zero, but these two films were based on themes from either the
Resistance or the war. Ladri di Biciclelte is the first decisive example of the
possibility of the conversion of this kind of objectivity to other, similar
subjects. De Sica and Zavattini have transferred neorealism from the Re-
sisJance to the Revolution,
Thus the the?,is of the film is hidden behind an objective social reality
which in turn moves into the background of the moral and psychological
drama which could of itself justify the film. The idea of the boy is a stroke
of genius, and one does not know definitely whether it came from the
script or in the process of directing, so little does this distinction mean
here any more. It is the child who gives to the workman's adventure its
ethical dimension and fashions, from an individual moral standpoint, a
drama that might well have been only social. Remove the boy, and the
story remains much the same. The proof ; a re^umi of it would not differ
in detail. In fact, the boy's part is confined to trottm^ along beside his
father. But he is the intimate witness of the tragedy, its private chorus. U
is supremely clever to have virtually eliminated the role of the wife in
order to give flesh and blood to the private character of the tragedy in the
person of the child. The complicity bet\A^cn father and son is so subtle
that it reaches down to the foundations of the moral life. It is the admira-
tion the child feels for his father and the father's awareness of it which
gives its tragic stature to the ending. The public shame of the worker, ex-
posed and clouted in the open street, is of little account compared with
the fact that his son witnessed it. When he feels tempted to steal the bike,
thQ silent presence of the little child, who guesses what his father is think-
ing, is cruel to the verge of obscenity. Tryino to |!et rid of him by sending
him to take the streetcar is like telling a child in some cramped apartment
53
What Is Cinema?
to go and wait on the landing outside for an hour. Only in the best Chaplin
films are there situations of an equally overwhelming conciseness.
In this connection, the fina) gesture of the little boy in giving his hand
to his father has been frequently misinterpreted. It would be unworthy of
the film to see here a concession to the feelings of the audience. If De Sica
gives them this satisfaction it is because it is a logical part of the drama.
This experience marks henceforth a definite stage in the relations between
father and son, rather like reaching puberty. Up to that moment the man
has been like a god to his son; their relations come under the heading of
admiration. By his action the father has now compromised them. The
tears they shed as they walk side by side, arms swinging, signify their
despair over a paradise lost. But the son returns to a father who has fallen
from grace. He will love him henceforth as a human being, shame and
all. The hand that slips into his is neither a symbol of forgiveness nor of a
childish act of consolation. It is rather the most solemn gesture thai could
ever mark the relations between a father and his son: one that makes them
equals.
It would take too long to enumerate the multiple secondary functions
of the boy in the film, both as to the story structure and as to the mise en
scene itself. However, one should at least pay attention to the change of
tone (almost in the musical sense of the term) that his presence intro-
duces into the middle of the film. As we stow?y wander back and forth
between the little boy and the workman we are taken from the social and
economic plane to that of their private lives, and the supposed death by
drowning of the child, in making the father suddenly reafoe the relative
insignificance of his misfortune, creates a dramatic oasis (the restaurant
scene) at the heart of the story. It is, however, an illusory one, because
the reality of this intimate happiness in the long run depends on the precious
bike. Thus the child provides a dramatic reserve which, as the occasion
arises, serves as a counterpoint, as an accompaniment, or moves on the
contrary into the foreground of the melodic structure. This function in the
story is, furthermore, clearly observable in the orchestration of the steps
of the child and of the grownup. Before choosing this particular child,
De Sica did not ask him to perform, just to walk. He wanted to play off
54
Bicycle Thief
the striding gait of the man against the short trotltng steps of the child, the
harmony of this discord being for him of capital importance for the
understanding of the fihii as a whole. It would be no exaggeration to say
that Ladri di Bkiclette is the story of a walk through Rome by a father
and his son. Whether the child is ahead, behind, alongside — or when,
sulking after having had his ears boxed, he is dawdling behind in a gesture
of revenge — what he is doing is never without meaning. On the contrary,
it is the phenomenology of the script.
It is difficult, after the success of this pairing of a workman and his son,
to imagine De Sica having recourse to established actors. The absence of
professional actors is nothing new. But here again Ladri di Biciclette goes
further than previous films. Henceforth the cinematic purity of the actors
does not derive from ski)), luck, or a happy combination of a subject, a
period, and a people. Probably too much importance has been attached
to the ethnic factor. Admittedly the Italians, like the Russians, are the most
naturally theatrical of people. In Italy any little street urchin is the equal
of a Jackie Coogan and life is a perpetual commedia deWarte. However,
it seems to me unlikely that these acting talents are shared equally by the
Milanese, the Neapolitans, the peasants of the Po, or the fishermen of
Sicily. Racial difference apart, the contrasts in their history, language, and
economic and social condhion would suffice to cast doubt on a thesis that
sought to attribute the natural acting ability of the Italian people simply
to an ethnic quality. It is inconceivable that films as different as Paisd,
Ladri di Biciclette, La Terra Tretm, and even II Cielo sulia Palude could
share in common such a superbly high level of acting. One could conceive
that the urban Italian has a special gift for spontaneous histrionics, but the
peasants in Cielo sulla Palude are absolute cavemen beside the farmers of
Farrebique. Merely to recall Rouquier's film in connection with Genlna's
is enough at least in this respect to relegate the experiment of the French
director to the level of a touchingly patronizing effort. Half the dialogue
in Farrebique is spoken off-stage because Rouquier could never get the
peasants not to laugh during a speech of any length. Genina in Cielo sulla
Palude, Visconti in La Terra Trema, both handling peasants or fishermen
by the dozen, gave them complicated roles and got them to recite long
55
What Is Cinema?
speeches in scenes in which the camera concenl rated on their faces as
pitilessly as in an American studio. It is an understatement to say that
these temporary actors are good or even perfect. In these films the very
concept of actor, performance, character has no longer any meaning. An
actorless cinema? Undoubtedly. But the original meaning of the formula
is now outdated, and we should talk today of a cinema without acting, of
a cinema of which we no longer ask whether the character gives a good
performance or not, since here man and the character he portrays are so
completely one.
We have not strayed as far as it might seem from Ladri di Biciclette.
De Sica hunted for his cast for a long time and selected them for specific
characteristics. Natural nobility, that purity of countenance and bearing
that the common people have ... He hesitated for months between this
person and that, took a hundred tests only to decide finally, in a flash and
by intuition on the basis of a silhouette suddenly come upon at the bend
of a road. But there is nothing miraculous about that. It is not the unique
excellence of this workman and this child that guarantees the quality of
their performance, but the whole aesthetic scheme into which they are
fitted. When De Sica was looking for a producer to finance his film, he
finally found one, but on condition that the workman was played by Gary
Grant. The mere statement of the problem in these terms shows the ab-
surdity of it. Actually, Cary Grant plays this kind of part extremely well,
but it is obvious that the question here is not one of playing of a part bul
of getting away from the very notion of doing any such thing. The worker
had to be at once as perfect and as anonymous and as objective as his
bicycle.
This concept of the actor is no less ''artistic" than the other. The per-
formance of this workman implies as many gifts of body and of mind and
as much capacity to take direction as any established actor has at his
command. Hitherto films that have been made either totally or in part
without actors, such as Tabu, Thunder over Mexico, Mother, have seem-
ingly been successes that are either out of the ordinary or limited to a cer-
tain genre. There is nothing on the other hand, unless it be sound prudence,
to prevent De Sica from making fifty films like Ladri di Biciclette. From
56
Bicycle Tliiej
0OW on we know that ihe absence of professional actors in no way limits
the choice of subject. The film without names has finally established its own
aesthetic existence. This in no sense means that the cinema of the future
will no longer use actors: De Sica who is one of the world's finest actors
would be the first to deny this. All it means is that some subjects handled
in a certain style can no longer be made with professional actors and that
the Italian cinema has definitely imposed these working conditions, just as
naturally as it imposed authentic settings. It is this transition from an
admirable tour de force, precarious as this may be, into an exact and in-
fallible technique that marks a decisive stage in the growth of Italian neo-
realism.
With the disappearance of the concept of the actor into a trans-
parency seemingly as natural as life itself, comes the disappearance of the
set. Let us understand one another, however. De Sica's film took a long
ume to prepare, and everything was as minutely planned as for a studio
superproduction, which as a matter of fact, allows for last-minute im-
provisations, but I cannot remember a single shot in which a dramatic
effect is bom of the shooting script properly so called, which seems as
neutral as in a Chaplin film. All the same, the numbering and titling of
shots does not noticeably distinguish Ladri di Biciclette jmm any ordinary
film. But their selection has been made with a view to raising the limpidity
of the event to a maximum, while keeping the index of refraction from
the style to a minimum.
This objectivity is rather different from RosseIlini*s in Faisa but it
belongs to the same school of aesthetics. One may criticize it on the same
grounds that Gide and Martin du Garde criticized romantic prose — that
it must tend in the direction of the most neutral kind of transparency. Just
as the disappearance of the actor is the result of transcending a style of
performance, the disappearance of the mise en scene is likewise the fruit
of a dialectical progress in the style of the narrative. If the event is suffi-
cient unto itself without the direction having to shed any further light on it
by means of camera angles, purposely chosen camera positions, it is be-
cause it has reached that stage of perfect luminosity which makes it pos-
57
Wfwt Is Cinema?
sible for an art to unmask a nature which in the end resembles it. That is
why the impression made on us by Ladri di Biciclette is unfailingly that
of truth.
If this supreme naturalness, the sense of events observed haphazardly
as the hours roll by, is the result of an ever-present although invisible sys-
tem of aesthetics, it is definitely the prior conception of the scenario which
allows this to happen. Disappearance of the actor, disappearance of mise
en scene? Unquestionably, but because the very principle of Ladri di
Biciclette is the disappearance of a story.
The term is equivocal. I Vnow of course that there is a story but of a
different kind from those we ordinarily see on the screen. This is even the
reason why De Sica could not find a producer to back him. When Roger
Leenhardt in a prophetic critical statement asked years ago "if the cinema
is a spectacle," he was contrasting the dramatic cinema with the novel-like
structure of the cinematic narrative. The former borrows from the theater
its hidden springs. Its plot, conceived as it may be specifically for the
screen, is still the alibi for an action identical in essence with the action of
the classical theater. On this score the film is a spectacle like a play. But
on the other hand, because of its realism and the equal treatment it gives f,^
man and to nature die cinema is related, aesthetically speaking, to the
novel.
Without going too far into a theory of the novel — a debatable subject
— let us say that the narrative form of the novel or that which derives from
it differs by and large from the theater in the primacy given to events over
action, to succession over causality, to mind over will. The conjunction
belonging to the theater is "therefore," the particle belonging to the novel
is "then." This scandalously rough definition is correct to the extent that
it characterizes the two different movements of the mind in thinking,
namely that of the reader and that of the onlooker, Proust can lose us in
a madeleine, but a playwright fails in his task if every reply does not link
our interest to the reply that is to follow. That is why a novel may be laid
down and then picked up again. A play cannot be cut into pieces. The
total unity of a spectacle is of its essence. To the extent that it can realize
58
Bicycle Thief
the physical reqmrements of a spectacle, the cinema cannot apparently
escape the spectacle's pyschological laws, but it has also at its disposal aU
the resources of the novel. For that reason, doubtless, the cinema is con-
geoitally a hybrid. It conceals a contradiction. Besides, clearly, the progres-
sion of the cinema is toward increasing its novel-like potential. Not that we
are against filmed theater, but if the screen can in some conditions develop
and give a new dimension to the theater, it is of necessity at the expense of
certain scenic values — the first of which is the physical presence of the
actor. Contrariwise, the novel at least ideally need surrender nothing to
the cinema. One may think of the film as a supemovel of which the
written form is a feeble and provisional version.
This much briefly said, how much of it can be found in the present
condition of the cinematographic spectacle? It is impossible to overlook
the spectacular and theatrical needs demanded of the screen. What re-
mains to be decided is how to reconcile the contradiction.
The Italian cinema of today is the first anywhere in the world to have
enough courage to cast aside the imperatives of the spectacular. La Terra
Trema and Cielo sulla Palude are films without "action," in the unfolding
of which, somewhat after the style of the epic novel, no concession is
made to dramatic tension. Things happen in them each at its appointed
hour, one after the other, but each carries an equal weight. If some are
fuller of meaning than others, it is only in retrospect. We are free to use
either "therefore" or "then." La Terra Trema, especially, is a film destined
to be virtually a commercial failure, unexploitable without cuts that would
leave it unrecognizable.
That is the virtue of De Sica and Zavattini. Their Ladri di Biciclette is
solidly structured in the mold of a tragedy. There is not one frame that is
not charged with an intense dramatic power, yet there is not one either
which we cannot fail to find interesting, its dramatic continuity apart.
The film unfolds on the level of pure accident: the rain, the sem-
inarians, the Catholic Quakers, the restaurant — all these are seemingly
interchangable, no one seems to have arranged them in order on a dramatic
spectrum. The scene in the thieves' quarter is significant. We are not sure
What Is Cinema?
that the man who was chased by the workman is actually the bicycle thief,
and we shall never know it the epileptic fit was a pretense or genuine. As
an "action" this episode would be meaningless had not its novel-like in-
terest, its value as a fact, given it a dramatic meaning lo boot.
It is in fact on its reverse side, and by parallels, that the action is as-
sembled— less in terms of "tension" than of a "summation" of the events.
Yes, it is a spectacle, and what a spectacle! Ladri di Biciclette, however,
does not depend on the mathematical elements of drama, the action does
not exist beforehand as if it were an "essence." It follows from the pre-
existence of the narrative, it is the "integral" of reality. De Sica's supreme
achievement, which others have so far only approached with a varying
degree of success or failure, is to have succeeded in discovering the cine-
matographic dialectic capable of transcending the contradiction between
the action of a "spectacle" and of an event. For this reason, Ladri di
Biciclette is one of the first examples of pure cinema. No more actors, no
more story, no more sets, which is to say that in the perfect aesthetic il-
lusion of reality there is no more cinema.
60
DE SICA: METTEUR EN SCENE
I MUST confess to the reader that my pen is paralyzed by scruples because
of the many compelling reasons why I should not be the one lo introduce
De Sica to him.
First, there is the presumption implied in a Frenchman wanting to
teach Italians something about their own cinema in general,* and, in
particular, about the man who is possibly their greatest director. Besides,
when I imprudently accepted (he honor of introducing De Sica in these
pages, 1 was particularly conscious of my admiration for Ladri di Bicidette
and I had not yet seen Mimcolo a Milano. We in France have of course,
seen Ladri di Bicidette, Sduscia, and / Bambini d guardano, but lovely
as Sciusdd is, and revealing as it is of the talents of De Sica, it bears, side
by side with certain sublime discoveries, traces of the apprentice director.
The scenario occasionally succumbs to melodramatic indulgence, and the
direction has a certain poetic elegance, a lyrical quality, that today it
seems to me De Sica is concerned to avoid. In short, we do not have there
as yet the personal style of the director. His complete and final mastery is
* This article, dating from 1952, was originally published in Italian by
Edizione Guanda (Parma, 1953 ). The \txi in the French edition of Qu'csf-re que
it' cinema?, from which this is translated, was itself a translation of the Italian
text.
61
What Is Cinema?
revealed in Ladri di Bicicleite to such an extent that the film seems to
include ail the efforts that went into the making of its predecessors.
But can one judge a director by a single film? This film is sufficient
proof of the genius of De Sica, but not of the future forms that this genius
will take. As an actor, De Sica is no newcomer to the cinema, but one
must still caU him "young" as a director— a director of the future. In
spite of the resemblances we will observe between them, Miracolo a Milano
differs greatly in inspiration and structure from Ladri di Biciclette. What
will his next film be? Will it reveal trends that appear only of minor im-
portance in the previous works? In short, we are undertaking to speak
of the style of a director of the first order on the basis of just two films —
one of which seems to conflict with the orientation of the other. This is all
right if one does not confuse the role of a critic with that of a prophet. I
have no trouble explaining why I admire Ladri and Miracolo but that is
something very different from pretending to deduce from these two films
what are the permanent and definitive characteristics of their maker's
talent.
All the same we would willingly have done that for Rossellini after
Roma Cittd Aperta and Faisa. What we would have been able to say (ai/d
what we actually wrote in France) ran the risk of being modified by Ros-
sellini's subsequent films, but not of being given the lie. The style of Rosel-
lini belongs to a different aesthetic family. The rules of its aesthetics are
plain to see. It fits a vision of the world directly adapted to a framework
of rrnse en scene. Rossellind's style is a way of seeing, while de Sica's is
primarily a way of feeling. The mise en scene of the former lays siege to
its object from outside, I do not mean without understanding and feeling —
but that this exterior approach offers us an essential ethical and meta-
physical aspect of our relations with the world. In order to understand
this statement one need only compare the treatment of the child in Alle-
mania Anno Zero and in Sciuscia and Ladri di Biciclette.
Rossellini's love for his characters envelops them in a desperate aware-
ness of man's inability to communicate; De Sica's love, on the contrary,
radiates from the people themselves. They are what they are, but lit from
withm by the tendemess he feels for them. It follows that RosseUini's
62
De Ska: Metteur en Scene
direction comes between Ms material and us, not as an artificial obstacle
set up between the two, but as an unbridgeable, ontological distance, a
congenital weakness of the human being which expresses itself aestheticaUy
in terms of space, in forms, in the structure of his mise-en-soene. Because
we are aware of it as a lack, a refusal, an escape from things, and hence
finally as a kind of pain, it follows that it is easier for us to be aware of it,
easier for us to reduce it to a formal method. Rossellini cannot alter this
without himself passing through a personal moral revolution.
By contrast, De Sica is one of those directors whose sole purpose
seems to be to interpret their scenarios faithfully, whose entire talent de-
rives from the love they have for their subject, from their ultimate under-
standing of it. The mise-en-scme seems to take shape after the fashion of
a natural form in living matter. Despite a different kind of sensibility and a
marked concern for form, Jacques Feyder in France also belongs to this
family of directors whose one method of work seems to be to treat their
subject honestly. This neutrality is illusory but its apparent existence does
not make the critic's task any easier. It divides up the output of the film
maker into so many special cases that, given one more film, all that has
preceded it might be called into question. It is a temptation therefore to
see only craftsmanship where one is looking for style, the generous humil-
ity of a clever technician meeting the demands of the subject instead of
the creative imprint of a true auteur.
The mise-en-scene of a Rossellini film can be readily deduced from
the images he uses, whereas De Sica forces us to arrive at his mise-en-
scene inductively from a visual narrative which does not seem to admit of it.
Finally and above all, the case of De Sica is up to now inseparable
from his collaboration with Zavattini, even more than is that of Marcel
Came in France with Jacques Prevert. There is no more perfect example
in the history of the cmema of a symbiosis of screen writer and director.
The fact that Zavattini collaborates with others, while Prevert has written
few stories or scripts for anyone but Came, makes no difference. On the
contrary, what it allows us to conclude is that De Sica is the ideal director
for Zavattini, the one who understands him best and most intimately. We
have examples of the work of Zavattini without De Sica, but nothing of
63
What Is Cinema?
De Sica without Zavattini, We are therefore undertaking arbitrarily to
distinguish that which truly belongs to De Sica and all the more arbitrarily
because we have just referred to his at least apparent humility in the face
of the demands of the scenario.
We must likewise refuse to separate, as something against nature, what
talent has so closely joined. May De Sica and Zavattini forgive us — and,
in advance, the reader, who can have no interest in my scruples and who
is waiting for me to get on with my task. I would like it understood, how-
ever, for my own peace of mind, that I aim only to attempt a few critical
statements which the future will doubtless call into question; they are
simply the personal testimony of a French critic writing in 1951 about
work full of promise, the qualities of which are particularly resistant to
aesthetic analysis. This profession of humility is in no sense just an ora-
torical precaution or a rhetorical formula. I beg the reader to believe that
it is first and foremost the measure of my admiration.
It is by way of its poetry that the realism of De Sica takes on its mean-
ing, for in art, at the source of all realism, there is an aesthetic paradox
that must be resolved. The faithful reproduction of reality is not art. We'
are repeatedly told that it consists in selection and interpretation. That is
why up to now the "realist" trends in cinema, as in other arts, consisted
simply in introducing a greater measure of reality into the work: but this
additional measure of reality was still only an effective way of serving an
abstract purpose, whether dramatic, moral, or ideological. In France,
"naturalism" goes hand in hand with the multiplication of novels and
plays a these. The originality of Italian neorealism as compared with the
chief schools of realism that preceded it and with the Soviet cinema, lies in
never making reality the servant of some a priori point of view. Even the
Dziga-Vertov theory of the "Kino-eye" only employed the crude reality
of everyday events so as to give it a place on the dialectic spectrum of
montage. From another point of view, theater (even realist theater) used
reality in the service of dramatic and spectacular structure. Whether in the
service of the interests of an ideological thesis, of a moral idea, or of a
dramatic action, realism subordinates what it borrows from reality to its
transcendent needs. Neorealism knows only immanence. It is from ap-
64
De Sica: Metteur en Scene
pearance only, the simple appearance of beings and of the world, that it
knows how to deduce the ideas that it unearths. It is a phenomenology.
In the realm of means of expression, neorealism runs counter to the
traditional categories of spectacle — above all, as regards acting. Accord-
ing to the classic understanding of this function, inherited from the theater,
the actor expresses something: a feeling, a passion, a desire, an idea.
From his attitude and his miming the spectator can read his face like an
open book. In this perspective, it is agreed implicitly between spectator
and actor that the same psychological causes produce the same physical
effect and that one can without any ambiguity pass backwards and for-
wards from one to the other. This is, strictly speaking, what is called acting.
The structures of the mise-en-scene flow from it: decor, lighting, the
angle and framing of the shots, will be more or less expressionistic in their
relation to the behavior of the actor. They contribute for their part to
confirm the meaning of the action. Finally, the breaking up of the scenes
into shots and their assemblage is the equivalent of an expressionism in
time, a reconstruction of the event according to an artificial and abstract
duration: dramatic duration. There is not a single one of these commonly
accepted assumptions of the film spectacle that is not challenged by
neorealism.
First, the performance: it caUs upon the actor to be before expressing
himself. This requirement does not necessarily imply doing away with the
professional actor but it normally tends to substitute tlie man in the street,
chosen uniquely for his general comportment, his ignorance of theatrical
technique being less a positively required condition than a guarantee
against the expressionism of traditional acting. For De Sica, Bruno was a
silhouette, a face, a way of walking.
Second, the setting and the photography: the natural setting is to the
artificial set what the amateur actor is to the professional. It has, however,
the effect of at least partly limiting the opportunity for plastic composi-
tions available with artificial studio lighting.
But it is perhaps especially the structure of the narrative which is
most radically turned upside down. It must now respect the actual dura-
tion of the event. The cuts that logic demands can only be, at best, descrip-
65
What Is Cinema?
tive. The assemblage of the film must never add anything to the existing
reality. If it is part of the meaning of the fihn as with Rossellini, it is be-
cause the empty gaps, the white spaces, the parts of the event that we are
not given, are themselves of a concrete nature: stones which are missing
from the building. It is the same in life: we do not know everything that
happens to others. Ellipsis in classic montage is an effect of style. In
Rossellini' s films it is a lacuna in reality, or rather in the knowledge we
have of it, which is by its nature limited.
Thus, neorealism is more an ontological position than an aesthetic one.
That is why the employment of its technical attributes like a recipe do not
necessarily produce it, as the rapid decline of American neorealism proves.
In Italy itself not all films without actors, based on a news item, and filmed
in real exteriors, are better than the traditional melodramas and spectacles.
On the contrary, a film like Cronaca di un A more by Michelangelo An-
totdoni can be described as neorealist (in spite of the professional actors, of
the detective-story-like arbitrariness of the plot, of expensive settings, and
the baroque dress of the heroine) because the director has not relied 07
an expressionism outside the characters; he builds all his effects on their
way of life, their way of crying, of walking, of laughing. They are caught
in the maze of the plot like laboratory rats being sent through a labyrinth.
The diversity of styles among the best Italian directors might be ad-
vanced as a counter argument and I know how much they dislike the
word neorealist, Zavattini is the only one who shamelessly admits to the
title. The majority protest against the existence of a new Italian school of
realism that would include them all. But that is a reflex reaction of the
creator to the critic. The director as artist is more aware of his differences
than his resemblances. The word neorealist was thrown like a fishing net
over the postwar Italian cinema and each director on his own is doing his
best to break the toils in which, it is claimed, he has been caught. How-
ever, in spite of this normal reaction, which has the added advantage of
forcing us to review a perhaps too easy critical classification, I think there
are good reasons for staying with it, even against the views of those most
concerned.
Certainly the succinct definition I have just given of neorealism might
appear on the surface to be given the lie by the work of Lattuada with its
66
De Ska: Metteur en Scene
calculated, subtly architectural vision, or by the baroque exuberance, the
romantic eloquence of De Santis, or by the refined theatrical sense of
Visconti, who makes compositions of the most down-to-earth reality as if
they were scenes from an opera or a classical tragedy. These terms are
summary and debatable, but can serve for other possible epithets which
consequently would confirm the existence of formal differences, of op-
positions in style. These three directors are as different from one another
as each is from De Sica, yet their common origin is evident if one takes a
more general view and especially if one stops comparing them with one
another and instead looks at the American, French, and Soviet cinema.
Neorealism does not necessarily exist in a pure state and one can
conceive of it being combined with other aesthetic tendencies. Biologists
distinguish, in genetics, characteristics derived from different parents, so-
called dominant factors. It is the same with neorealism. The exacerbated
theatricality of Malaparte's Crista Proibito may owe a lot to German
expressionism, but the film is nonetheless neorealist, radically different
from the realist expressionism of a Fritz Lang.
But I seem to have strayed a long way from De Sica. This was simply
that I might be better able to situate him in contemporary Italian produc-
tion. The difficulty of taking a critical stand about the director of Miracolo
a Milano might indeed be precisely the real indication of his style. Does
not our inability to analyze its formal characteristics derive from the fact
that it represents the purest form of neorealism, from the fact that Ladri di
Bicidette is the ideal center around which gravitate, each in his own orbit,
the works of the other great directors? It could be this very purity which
makes it impossible to define, for it has as its paradoxical intention not to
produce a spectacle which appears real, but rather to turn reality into a
spectacle; a man is walking along the street and the onlooker is amazed at
the beauty of the man walking.
Until further information is available, until the realization of Zavattini's
dream of filming eighty minutes in the life of a man without a cut, Ladri M
Bicidette is without a doubt the ultimate expression of neorealism.*
* Cf. note on Umberto D at the end of this chapter.
67
What Is Cinema?
Though this mise-en-scene aims at negating itself, at being transparent
to the reality it reveals, it would be naive to conclude that it does not exist.
Few films have been more carefully pat together, more pondered over,
more meticulously elaborated, but all this labor by De Sica tends to give
the illusion of chance, to result in giving dramatic necessity the character
of something contingent. Better still, he has succeeded in making dramatic
contingency the very stuff of drama. Nothing happens in Ladri di Bicidette
that might just as well not have happened. The worker could have chanced
upon his bicycle in the middle of the film, the lights in the auditorium
would have gone up and De Sica would have apologized for having dis-
turbed us, but after all, we would be happy for the worker's sake. The
marvelous aesthetic paradox of this film is that it has the relentless quality
of tragedy while nothing happens in it except by chance. But it is precisely
from the dialectical synthesis of contrary values, namely artistic order and
the amorphous disorder of reality, that it derives its originality. There is
not one image that is not charged with meaning, that does not drive home
into the mind the sharp end of an unforgettable moral truth, and not one
that to this end is false to the ontological ambiguity of reality. Not one ges-
ture, not one incident, not a single object in the film is given a prior sig-
nificance derived from the ideology of the director.
If they are set in order with an undeniable clarity on the spectrum of
social tragedy, it is after the manner of the particles of iron filings on the
spectrum of a magnet — that is to say, individually; but the result of this
art in which nothing is necessary, where nothing has lost the fortuitous
character of chance, is in effect to be doubly convincing and conclusive.
For, after all, it is not surprising that the novelist, the playwright, or the
film maker should make it possible for us to hit on this or that idea, since
they put them there beforehand, and have seeded their work with them.
Put salt into water, let the water evaporate in the fire of reflection, and you
will get back the salt. But if you find salt in water drawn directly from a
stream, it is because the water is salty by nature. The workman, Bruno,
might have found his bike just as he might have won in the lottery — even
poor people win lotteries. But this potential capacity only serves to bring
out more forcefully the terrible powerlessness of the poor fellow. If he
68
founJ his bike, then the enormous extent of his good luck would be an
even greater condemnation of society, since it would make a priceless
jniracle, an exorbitant favor, out of the return to a human order, to a
natural state of happiness, since it would signify his good fortune at not
still being poor.
It is clear to what an extent this neorealism differs from the formal
concept which consists of decking out a formal story with touches of
reality. As for the technique, properly so called, Ladri di Biciclette, like a
lot of other films, was shot in the street with nonprofessional actors but its
true merit lies elsewhere: in not betraying the essence of things, in allow-
ing them first of all to exist for their own sakes, freely; it is in loving them
in their singular individuality. "My little sister reality," says De Sica, and
she circles about him like the birds around Saint Francis. Others put her
in a cage or teach her to talk, but De Sica talks with her and it is the true
language of reality that we hear, the word that cannot be denied, that
only love can utter.
To explain De Sica, we must go back to the source of his art, namely
to his tenderness, his love. The quality shared in common by Miracolo a
Milano and Ladri di Biciclette, in spite of differences more apparent than
real, is De Sica's inexhaustible affection for his characters. It is significant
then in Miracolo a Milano, that none of the bad people, even the proud
or treacherous ones, are antipathetic. The junkyard Judas who seUs his
companions' hovels to the vulgar Mobbi does not stir the least anger in
the onlookers. Rather would he amuse us in the tawdry costume of the
"villain" of melodrama, which he wears awkwardly and clumsily: he is a
good traitor. In the same way the new poor, who in their decline still re-
tain the proud ways of their former fine neighborhoods, are simply a
special variety of that human fauna and are not therefore excluded from
the vagabond community — even if they charge people a lira a sunset. And
a man must love the sunset with all his heart to come up with the idea of
making people pay for the sight of it, and to suffer this market of dupes.
Besides, none of the principal characters in Ladri di Biciclette is un-
sympathetic. Not even the thief. When Bruno finally manages to get his
hands on him, the public would be morally disposed to lynch him, as the
69
What Is Cinema?
crowd could have done earlier to Bruno. But the spark of genius in this
film is to force us to swallow this hatred the moment it is bom and to re-
nounce judgment, just as Bruno will refuse to bring charges.
The only unsympathetic characters in Miracolo a Milano are Mobbi
and his acolytes, but basically they do not exist. They are only conven-
tional symbols. The moment De Sica shows them to us at slightly closer
quarters, we almost feel a tender curiosity stirring inside us. "Poor rich
people," we are tempted to say, "how deceived they are." There are many
ways of loving, even including the way of the inquisitor. The ethics and
politics of love are threatened by the worst heresies. From this point of
view, hate is often more tender, but the affection De Sica feels for his
creatures is no threat to them, there is nothing threatening or abusive about
it. It is courtly and discreet gentleness, a liberal generosity, and it demands
nothing in return. There is no admixture of pity in it even for the poorest
or the most wretched, because pity does violence to the dignity of the man
who is its object. It is a burden on his conscience.
The tenderness of De Sica is of a special kind and for this reason does
not easily lend itself to any moral, religious, or political generalization. The
ambiguities of Miracolo a Milano and Ladri di Biciclette have been used
by the Christian Democrats and by the Communists. So much the better: a
true parable should have something for everyone. I do not think De Sica
and Zavattini were trying to argue anybody out of anything. I would not
dream of saying that the kindness of De Sica is of greater value than the
third theological virtue* or than class consciousness, but I see in the
modesty of his position a definite artistic advantage. It is a guarantee of its
authenticity while, at the same time, assuring it a universal quality. This
penchant for love is less a moral question than one of personal and ethnic
temperament. As for its authenticity, this can be explained in terms of a
naturally happy disposition developed in a Neopolitan atmosphere. But
these psychological roots reach down to deeper layers than the conscious-
ness cultivated by partisan ideologies. Paradoxically and in virtue of their
unique quality, of their inimitable flavor, since they have not been clasa-
* The three theological virtues are faith, hope and charity, — TR,
70
De Ska: Menem en Scene
fied in ^he categories of either morals or politics, they escape the latter's
censure, and the Neopolitan charm of De Sica becomes, thanks to the
cinema, the most sweeping message of love that our times have heard
since Chaplin.
To anyone who doubted the importance of this, it is enough to point
out how quick partisan critics were to lay claim to it. What party indeed
could afford to leave love to the other? In our day there is no longer a
place for unattached love but since each party can with equal plausibility
lay claim to being the proprietor of it, it means that much authentic and
naive love scales the walls and penetrates the stronghold of ideologies and
social theory.
Let us be thankful to Zavattini and De Sica for the ambiguity of their
position — and let us take care not to see it as just intellectual astuteness in
the land of Don Camillo, a completely negative concern to give pledges on
all sides in return for an all-around censorship clearance. On the contrary
it is a positive striving after poetry, the stratagem of a person in love, ex-
pressing himself in the metaphors of his time, while at the same time mak-
ing sure to choose such of them as wiU open the hearts of everyone. The
reason why there have been so many attempts to give a political exegesis
to Miracolo a Milano is that Zavattini's social allegories are not the final
examples of this symbolism, these symbols themselves being simply the
allegory of love. Psychoanalysts explain to us that our dreams are the very
opposite of a free flow of images. When these express some fundamental
desire, it is in order perforce to cross the threshold of the super-ego, hiding
behind the mark of a two-fold symbolism, one general, the other in-
dividual But this censorship is not something negative. Without it, without
the resistance it offers to the imagination, dreams would not exist.
There is only one way to think of Miracolo a Milano, namely as a
reflection, on the level of a film dream, and through the medium of the
social symbolism of contemporary Italy, of the warm heart of Vittorio De
Sica. This would explain what seems bizarre and inorganic in this strange
film: otherwise it is hard to understand the gaps in its dramatic continuity
and its indifference to all narrative logic.
71
What Is Cinema?
In passing, we might note how much the cinema owes to a love for
living creatures. There is no way of completely understanding the art of
Flaherty, Renoir, Vigo, and especially Chaplin unless we try to discover
beforehand what particular kind of tenderness, of sensual or sentimental
affection, they reflect. In my opinion, the cinema more than any other art
is particularly bound up with love. The novelist jn his relations to his
characters needs intelligence more than love; understanding is his form of
loving. If the art of a Chaplin were transposed into literature, it would
tend to lapse into sentimentality; that is why a man like Andre Suares, a
man of letters par excellence, and evidently impervious to the poetry of
the cinema, can talk about the "ignoble heart" of Chaplin when this heart
brings to the cinema the nobility of myth. Every art and every stage in the
evolution of each art has its specific scale of values. The tender, amused
sensuality of Renoir, the more heart-rending tenderness of Vigo, achieve
on the screen a tone and an accent which no other medium of expression
could give them. Between such feelings and the cinema there exists a
mysterious affinity which is sometimes denied even to the greatest of men.
No one better than De Sica can lay claim to being the successor to Chaplin.
We have already remarked how as an actor he has a quality of presence, a
light which subtly transforms both the scenario and the other actors to
such an extent that no one can pretend to play opposite De Sica as he
would opposite someone else. We in France have not hitherto known the
brilliant actor who appeared in Camerini's films. He had to become famous
as a director before he was noticed by the public. By then he no longer
had the physique of a young leading man, but his charm survived, the
more remarkable for being the less easy te explain. Even when appearing
as just a simple actor in the films of other directors, De Sica was already
himself a director since his presence modified the film and influenced its
style. Chaplin concentrates on himself and within himself the radiation of
his tenderness, which means that cruelty is not always excluded from his
world; on the contrary, it has a necessary and dialectic relationship to love,
as is evident from Monsieur Verdoux. Charlie is goodness itself, projected
onto the world. He is ready to love everything, but the world does not
always respond. On the other hand, De Sica the director infuses into his
72
De Ska: MeUew en Scene
actors the power to love that he himself possesses as an actor. Chaplin also
chooses his cast carefully but always with an eye to himself and to putting
liis character in a better light. We find in De Sica the humanity of Chaplin,
but shared with the world at large. De Sica possesses the gift of being able
to convey an intense sense of the human presence, a disarming grace of
expression and of gesture which, in their unique way, are an irresistible
testimony to man. Ricci {Ladri di Bicidette), Toto (Miracolo a Milatio),
and Vmberto D, although greatly differing in physique from Chaplin and
De Sica, make us think of them.
It would be a mistake to believe that the love De Sica bears for man,
and forces us to bear witness to, is a form of optimism. If no one is really
bad, if face to face with each individual human being we are forced to drop
our accusation, as was Ricci when he caught up with the thief, we Hre
obliged to say that the evil which undeniably does exist in the world is
elsewhere than in the heart of man, that it is somewhere in the order of
things. One could say it is in society and be partly right. In one way Ladri
di Bicidette, Miracolo a Milano, and Umberto D are indictments of a
revolutionary nature. If there were no unemployment it would not be a
tragedy to lose one's bicycle. However, this political explanation does not
cover the whole drama. De Sica protests the comparison that has been
made between Ladri di Bicidette and the works of Kafka on the grounds
that his hero's alienation is social and not metaphysical. True enough, but
Kafka's myths are no less valid if one accepts them as allegories of social
alienation, and one does not have to believe in a cruel God to feel the guilt
of which Joseph K. is culpable. On the contrary, the drama lies in this:
God does not exist, the last office in the castle is empty. Perhaps we have
here the particular tragedy of today's world, the raising of a self-deifying
social reality to a transcendental state.
The troubles of Bruno and Umberto D have their immediate and evi-
dent cames bm we also observe that there is an insoluble residue comprised
of the psychological and material complexities of our social relationships,
which neither the high quality of an institution nor the good will of our
neighbors can dispose of. The nature of the latter is positive and social, but
73
its action proceeds always from a necessity that is at once absurd and im-
perative. This is, in my opinion, what makes this film so great and so rich.
It renders a two-fold justice: one by way of an irrefutable description of
the wretched condition of the proletariat, another by way of the implicit
and constant appeal of a human need that any society whatsoever must
respect. It condemns a world in which the poor are obliged to steal from
one another to survive (the police protect the rich only too well) but this
imposed condemnation is not enough, because it is not only a given his-
torical institution that is in question or a particular economic setup, but
the congenital indifference of our social organization, as such, to the for-
tuitousness of individual happiness. Otherwise Sweden could be the earthly
paradise, where bikes are left along the sidewalk both day and night. De
Sica loves mankind, his brothers, too much not to want to remove every
conceivable cause of their unhappiness, but he also reminds us that e'«ry
man's happiness is a miracle of love whether in Milan or anywhere else. A
society which does not take every opportunity to smother happiness is
aheady better than one which sows hate, but the most perfect still would
not create love, for love remains a private matter between man and man.
In what country in the world would they keep rabbit hutches in an oil
field? In what other would the loss of an administrative document not be
as agonizing as the theft of a bicycle? It is part of the realm of politics to
think up and promote the objective conditions necessary for human happi-
ness, but it is not part of its essential function to respect its subjective con-
ditions. In the universe of De Sica, there lies a latent pessimism, an un-
avoidable pessimism we can never be grateful enough to him for, because
in it resides the appeal of the potential of man, the witness to his final and
irrefutable humanity.
I have used the word love. I should rather have said poetry. These two
words are synonymous or at least complementary. Poetry is but the active
and creative form of love, its projection into the world. Although spoiled
and laid waste by social upheaval, the childhood of the shoeshine boy has
retained the power to transform his wretchedness in a dream. In France,
in the primary schools, the children are taught to say "Who steals an egg,
74
De Sica: Meiieur en Seine
steals a bull." De Sica's fonnula is "Who steals an egg is dreaming of a
horse." Toto's miraculous gift which was handed on to him by his adopted
grandmother is to have retained from childhood an inexhaustible capacity
for defense by way of poetry; the piece of business I find most significant
in Miracolo a Milano is that of Emma Grammatica rushing toward the
spilled milk. It does not matter who else scolds Toto for his lack of initia-
tive and wipes up the milk with a cloth, so long as the quick gesture of the
old woman has as its purpose to turn the little catastrophe into a marvelous
game, a stream in the middle of a landscape of the same proportion. And
so on to the multiplication tables, another profound terror of one's child-
hood, which, thanks to the little old woman, turns into a dream. City
dweller Toto names the streets and the squares "four times four is sixteen"
or "nine times nine is eighty-one," for these cold mathematical symbols
are more beautiful in his eyes than the names of the characters of mythol-
ogy. Here again we think of Charlie; he also owes to his childhood spirit
his remarkable power of transforming the world to a better purpose.
When reality resists him and he cannot materially change it — ^he switches
its meaning. Take for example, the dance of the rolls, in The Gold Rush,
or the shoes in the soup pot, with this proviso that, always on the defensive,
Chariie reserves his power of metamorphosis for his own advantage, or,
at most, for the benefit of the woman he loves. Toto on the other hand
goes out to others. He does not give a moment's thought to any benefit the
dove can bring him, his joy lies in his being able to spread joy. When he
can no longer do anything for his nei^bor he takes it on himself to assume
various shapes, now limping for the lame man, making himself small for
the dwarf, blind for the one-eyed man. The dove is just an arbitrarily
added possibility, to give poetry a material form, because most people
need something to assist their imaginations. But Toto does not know what
to do with himself unless it is for someone else's benefit,
Zavattini told me once: "I am like a painter standing before a Md,
who asks himself which blade of grass he should begin with." De Sica is
the ideal director for a declaration of faith such as this. There is also the art
of the playwright who divides the moments of life into episodes which, in
75
respect of the moments lived, are what the blades of grass are to the field.
To paint every blade of grass one must be the Douanier Rousseau. In the
world of cinema one must have the love of a De Sica for creation itself.
A Note on Umberto D
Until I saw Umberto D, I considered Ladri di Biciclette as having reached
the uttermost limits of neorealism so far as the concept of narrative is
concerned. It seems to me today that Ladri di Biciclette falls far short of
the ideal Zavattini subject. Not that I consider Umberto D superior.
The unmatchable superiority of Ladri di Biciclette still resides in the para-
dox of its having reconciled radically opposite values: factual freed'/m
and narrative discipline. But the authors only achieve this by sacrificing
the continuum of reality. In Umberto D one catches a glimpse, on a num-
ber of occasions, of what a truly realist cinema of time could be, a cinema
of ''duration."
These experiments in continuous time are not new in cinema. Alfred
Hitchcock's Rope, for example, runs for eighty uninterrupted minutes.
But there it was just a question of action such as we have in the theater.
The real problem is not the continuity of the exposed film but the temporal
structure of the incident.
Rope could be filmed without a change of focus, without any break
in the shots, and still provide a dramatic spectacle, because in the original
play the incidents were already set in order dramatically according to an
artificial time — theatrical time — just as there is musical time and dance
time.
In at least two scenes of Umberto D the problem of subject and script
take on a different aspect. In these instances it is a matter of making "life
time" — the simple continuing to be of a person to whom nothing in particu-
lar happens — take on the quality of a spectacle, of a drama. I am thinking
in particular of when Umberto D goes to bed, having retired to his room
thinking he has a fever and, especially, of the little servant girl's awakening
76
De Ska: Metteur en Scene
[n the raoming. These two sequences undoubtedly constitute the ultimate
'^performance" of a certain kind of cinema, at the level of what one
^ould call "the invisible subject," by which I mean the subject entirely
dissolved in the fact to which it has given rise; while when a film is taken
from a story, the latter continues to survive by itself like a skeleton without
its muscles; one can always "tell" the story of the film.
The function of the subject is here no less essential than the story but
its essence is reabsorbed into the scenario. To put it another way, the sub-
ject exists before the working scenario, but it does not exist afterward.
Only tlie "fact" exists which the subject had itself forecast. If I try to
recount the film to someone who has not seen it — for example what Um-
berto D is doing in his room or the little servant Maria in the kitchen, what
is there left for me to describe? An impalpable show of gestures without
meaning, from which the person I am talking to cannot derive the slightest
\6fA of the emotion thai gripped the viewer. The subject here is sacrificed
beforehand, like the wax in the casting of the bronze.
At the scenario level this type of subject corresponds, reciprocally, to
the scenario based entirely on the behavior of the actor. Since the real
time of the narrative is not that of the drama but the concrete duration of
the character, this objectiveness can only be transformed into a mise en
scene (scenario and action) in terms of something totally subjective. I
mean by this that the film is identical with what the actor is doing and
with this alone. The outside world is reduced to being an accessory to this
pure action, which is sufficient to itself in the same way that algae deprived
of air produce the oxygen they need. The actor who gives a representa-
tion of a particular action, who "interprets a part" always, in a measure,
directs himself because he is calling more or less on a system of generally
accepted dramatic conventions which are learned in conservatories. Not
even these conventions are any help to him here. He is entirely m the
hands of the director in this complete replica of life.
True, Umbeno D is not a perfect film like Ladri di Bkidette, but this
is perhaps understandable since its ambition was greater. Less perfect in
its entirety but certainly more perfect and more unalloyed in some of its
parts — ^those in which De Sica and Zavattini exhibit complete fidelity to
77
What Is Cinema?
the aesthetic of neorealism. That is why one must not accuse Umberto D
of facile sentimentality, some measure of modest appeal to social pity. The
good qualities and even, for that matter, the defects of the film are far
beyond any categories of morality or politics. We are dealing here with
a cinematographic "report," a disconcerting and irrefutable observation
on the human condition. One may or may not find it to one's taste that
this report should be made on the life of a minor functionary boarding with
a family or on a little pregnant servant; but, certainly, what we have just
learned about this old man and this girl as revealed through their acci-
dental misfortunes above aU concerns the human condition. I have no
hesitation in stating that the cinema has rarely gone such a long way
toward making us aware of what it is to be a man. (And also, for that
matter, of what it is to be a dog.)
Hitherto dramatic literature has provided us with a doubtless ex^tct
knowledge of the human soul, but one which stands in the same relation to
man as classical physics to matter — what scientists call macrophysics, use-
£o.onIyforpherenaofcoasiderab.emagnicude.Andcerta4'a,e„ovel
has gone to extremes in categorizing this knowledge. The emotional physics
of a Proust is microscopic. But the matter with which this microphysics is
concerned is on the inside. It is memory. The cinema is not necessarily a
substitute for the novel in this search after man, but it has at least one
advantage over it, namely, that it presents man only in the present — to the
"time lost and found" of Proust there corresponds in a measure the "time
discovered" of Zavattini; this is, in the contemporary cinema, something
like Proust in the present indicative tense.
78
UMBERTO D: A GREAT WORK
MiRACOLO IN MiLANO Created only discord. In the absence of the general
enthusiasm that greeted Ladri di Biciclette the originality of the scenario,
the mixture of the fantastic and the commonplace, and the penchant of
our time for political cryptography stirred up around this strange film a sort
of succes de scandale (which Micheline Vian has debunked with relentless
humor in an excellent article published in Les Temps modernes).
A conspiracy of silence, a sullen and obstinate reticence, is building up
against Umberto D and as a result even the good that has been written about
it seems to condemn the jfilm with faint praise; though it is a kind of mute
ill humor or even contempt (to which no one is prepared to admit in view
of the illustrious past of its makers) that in secret animates the hostility of
more than one critic. There will certainly be no "Battle of Umberto D."
And yet it is one of the most revolutionary and courageous films of
the last two years — ^not only of the Italian cinema but of European cinema
as a whole, a masterpiece to which film history is certainly going to grant
a place of honor, even if for the moment an inexplicable failure of attention
or a certain blindness on the part of those who love the cinema allows it
only a reluctant and ineffective esteem.
If there are lines outside theaters showing Adorahles creatures or he
Fruit dejendu, it is perhaps in part because the brothels have been closed;
79
What Is Cinema?
all the same, there should be a few tens of thousands of people in Paris
who expect other pleasures from film.
For the Paris public to be properly shamed, must Umberto D leave
the marquees before it has had the kind of run it deserves?
The chief reason for the misunderstandings that have arisen about
Umberto D lies in comparing it with Ladri di Biciclette. Some will say
with some semblance of reason that De Sica "returns to neorealism'* here,
after the poetico-realist interlude of Miracolo in Milano. This is true, but
only if one hastens to add that the perfection of Ladri di Biciclette was only
a beginning, though it was first regarded as a culmination. It took Um-
berto D to make us understand what it was in the realism of Ladri di Bi-
ciclette that was stUl a concession to classical dramaturgy. Consequently
what is so unsettling about Umberto D is primarily the way it rejects any
relationship to traditional film spectacle. '
Of course, if we take just the theme of the film we can reduce it to a
seemingly "populist'* melodrama with social pretensions, an appeal on
behalf of the middle class : a retired minor official reduced to penury de-
cides against suicide because he can neither find someone to take care
of his dog nor pluck up enough courage to kUl it before he kills himself.
This final episode is not the moving conclusion to a dramatic series of
events. If the classical concept of "construction" still has some meaning
here, the sequence of events which De Sica reports obeys a necessity that
has nothing to do with dramatic structure. What kind of causal relation-
ship could you establish between a harmless angina for which Umberto D
will be treated in hospital, his landlady's turning him out on the street, and
his thinking of suicide? The notice to vacate was served irrespective of
the angina. A "dramatic author" would have made the angina acute in
order to establish a logical and a pathetic relationship between the two
things. Here, on the contrary, the period in hospital is in effect hardly
justified by the real state of Umberto D's health; rather than making us
pity him for his unhappy lot, it is really a rather cheerful episode. That is
not where the question lies, though. It is not his real poverty that moves
Umberto D to despair, though it is in a very real sense a contributing fac-
tor, but only in the degree that it shows him just how lonely he is. The
80
Umber to D
few things which Umberto D must rely on others to do for him are all it
takes to alienate his few human contacts. To the extent that it is indeed
the middle class that is involved, the film reports the secret misery, the
egoism, the lack of fellow-feeling which characterizes its members. Its pro-
tagonist advances step by step further into his solitude: the person closest to
him, the only one to show him any tenderness, is his landlady's little maid;
but her kindness and her goodwill cannot prevail over her worries as an un-
wed mother-to-be. Through his one friendship, then, there runs the motif
of despair.
But here I am now lapsing back into traditional critical concepts,
though I am talking about a film whose originality I set out to prove.
If one assumes some distance from the story and can still see in it a
dramatic patterning, some general development in character, a single gen-
eral trend in its component events, this is only after the fact. The narrative
unit is not the episode, the event, the sudden turn of events, or the charac-
ter of its protagonists; it is the succession of concrete instants of life, no one
of which can be said to be more important than another, for their ontologi-
cal equality destroys drama at its very basis. One v;onderful sequence —
it will remain one of the high points of film — is a perfect illustration of
this approach to narrative and thus to direction: the scene in which the
maid gets up. The camera confines itself to watching her doing her little
chores; moving around the kitchen still half asleep, drowning the ants that
have invaded the sink, grinding the coffee. The cinema here is conceived
as the exact opposite of that "art of ellipsis" to which we are much too
ready to believe it devoted. Ellipsis is a narrative process; it is logical in
nature and so it is abstract as well; it presupposes analysis and choice; it
organizes the facts in accord with the general dramatic direction to which it
forces them to submit. On the contrary, De Sica and Zavattini attempt to
divide the event up into still smaller events and these into events smaller
still, to the extreme limits of our capacity to perceive them in time. Thus,
the unit event in a classical film would be ''the maid's getting out of bed";
two or three brief shots would suffice to show this. De Sica replaces this
narrative unit with a series of "smaller" events: she wakes up; she crosses
the hall; she drowns the ants; and so on. But let us examine just one of
81
these. We see how the grinding of the coffee is divided in turn into a series
of independent moments; for example, when she shuts the door with the
tip of her outstretched foot. As it goes in on her the camera foUows the
movement of her leg so that the image finally concentrates on her toes
feeling the surface of the door. Have I already said that it is Zavattini's
dream to make a whole film out of ninety minutes in the life of a man to
whom nothing happens? That is precisely what "neorealism" means for
for him. Two or three sequences in Umber to D give us more than a
glimpse of what such a film might be like; they are fragments of it that
have already been shot. But let us make no mistake about the meaning
and the value realism has here. De Sica and Zavattini are concerned to
make cinema the asymptote of reality — but in order that it should ulti-
mately be life itself that becomes spectacle, in order that life might in this
perfect mirror be visible poetry, be the self into which film finally changf^
it*
* "Telle qu'en elle-meme, enfin, le cinema la change." Bazin here rewrites the
first line of Mallarme's famous sonnet Tombeau d'Edgar Foe, "Tel qu'en lui-
meme, enfin, Feternite le change."
82
CABIRIA: THE
VOYAGE TO THE END OF NEOREALISM
As I SIT DOWN to write this article, I have no idea what kind of reception
Fellini's latest film will have, I hope it is as enthusiastic as I thmk it should
be, but I do not conceal from myself the fact that there are two categories
of viewers who may have reservations about the film. The first is that seg-
ment of the general public likely to be put off by the way the story mixes
the strange with what seems to be an almost melodramatic naivete. These
people can accept the theme of the whore with a heart of gold only if
it is spiced with crime. The second belongs, albeit reluctantly, to that
part of the "elite" which supports Fellini aknost in spite of itself. Con-
strained to admire La Strada and under even more constraint from its
austerity and its "outcast" status to admire II Bidone, I expect these view-
ers now to criticize Le Notti di Cabiria for being "too well made" — a film
in which practically nothing is left to chance, a film that is clever — artful,
even. Let's forget the first objection; it is important only in the effect it may
have at the box office. The second, however, is worth refuting.
The least surprising thing about Le Notti di Cabiria is not that this is
the first time Fellini has succeeded in putting together a masterly script,
with an action that cannot be faulted — unmarred by cliches or missing
links, one in which there could be no place for the unhappy cuts and the cor-
83
rections in editing from which La Strada and // Bidone suffered.* Of
course, Lo Sceicco bianco and even / Vitelloni were not clumsy in their
construction, but chiefly because, though their themes were specifically
Felhnian, they were still being expressed within a framework provided by
relatively traditional scenarios. Fellini has finally cast these crutches aside
with La Strada: theme and character alone are the final determinants in
the story now, to the exclusion of all else; story has nothing now to do
with what one calls plot; I even have doubts that it is proper here to
speak of "action." The same is true of // Bidone.
It is not that FeUini would Hke to return to the excuses which drama
affords him in his earlier films. Quite the contrary. Le Notti di Cabiria
goes even beyond // Bidone, but here the contradictions between what
I will call the ''verticality" of its author's themes and the "horizontaUty"
of the requirements of narrative have been reconciled. It is within ;he
Felhnian system that he now finds his solutions. This does not prevent the
viewer from possibly mistaking brihiant perfection for mere facility, if
not indeed for betrayal. All the same, on one score at least Fellini has
deceived himself a httle: is he not counting on the character played by
Francois Pcrier (who to me seems miscast) to have a surprise effect? Now
it is clear that any effect of "suspense" or even of "drama" is essentially
alien to the Fellinian system, in which it is impossible for time ever to serve
as an abstract or dynamic support — as an a priori framework for narra-
tive structure. In La Strada as in // Bidone, time is nothing more than the
shapeless framework modified by fortuitous events which affect the fate of
his heroes, though never in consequence of external necessity. Events do
not "happen" in Fellini's world; they "befall" its inhabitants; that is to say,
they occur as an effect of "vertical" gravity, not in conformity to the laws
* Alas, the facts give me the lie: the original -language version shown in Paris
reveals the deletion of at least one long scene that was still in the film when it was
shown at Cannes, namely the scene of "the visitor of Saint Vincent de Paul" to
which I allude below. But then we have seen how easy it has been in the past to
convince Fellini— if it is indeed he who is responsible for this cut — that a truly
remarkable sequence is "useless," [The "visitor" is a member of the Society of
Saint Vincent de Paul founded in France in 1833 to care for the sick, the aged,
the poor, and what were then known as "fallen women." — TR.]
84
Cabiria
of "horizontal" causality. As for the characters themselves, they exist and
change only in reference to a purely internal kind of time — which I cannot
qualify even as Bergsonian, in so far as Bergson's theory of the Donnees
immediates de la conscience contains a strong element of psychologism.
Let us avoid the vague terms ot a "spiritualizing" vocabulary. Let us not
say that the transformation of the characters takes place at the level of
the "soul." But it has at least to occur at that depth of their being into
which consciousness only occasionally reaches down. This does not mean
at the level of the unconscious or the subconscious but rather the level on
which what Jean-Paul Sartre calls the "basic project" obtains, the level
of ontology. Thus the Fellinian character does not evolve; he ripens or
at the most becomes transformed (whence the metaphor of the angel's
wings, to which I will shortly return).
A Spurious Melodrama
But let us confine ourselves, for the moment, to the structure of the
script. I totally reject, then, the coup de theatre in Le Notti di Cabiria
which belatedly reveals Oscar a swindler. Fellini must have been aware
of what he was doing because, as if to compound his sin, he makes Fran-
cois Perier wear dark glasses when he is about to turn "wicked." What
of it? This is a minor concession indeed and I find it easy to pardon in
view of the care Fellini now takes to avoid in this film the grave danger
to which a complicated and much too facile shooting script exposed him in
// Bidone.
I find it all the more easy to pardon when it is the only concession he
makes in this film; for the rest Fellini communicates the tension and the
rigor of tragedy to it without ever having to fall back on devices alien to his
universe. Cabiria, the little prostitute whose simple soul is rooted in hope,
is not a character out of melodrama, because her desire to "get out" is not
motivated by the ideals of bourgeois morality or a strictly bourgeois socio-
logy. She does not hold her trade in contempt. As a matter of fact, if there
85
What Is Cinema?
were such creatures as pure-hearted pimps capable of understanding her
and of embodying not love indeed but just a belief in life, she would doubt-
less ^e no incompatibility between her secret hopes and her nighttime
activities. Does she not owe one of her greatest moments of happiness —
happiness followed consequently by an even more bitter deception — to her
chance meeting with a famous film star who because he is drunk and feel-
ing embittered against love proposes to take her home to his luxurious
apartment. There was something to make the other girls just die of envy!
But the incident is fated to come to a pitiful end, because after all a prosti-
tute's trade commonly destines her only to disappointments; this is why
she longs, more or less consciously, to get out of it through the impossible
love of some stalwart fellow who will make no demands of her. If we seem
now to have reached an outcome typical of bourgeois melodrama, it is '"n
any case by a very different route.
Le Notti di Cabiria — like La Sfrada, like II Bidone, and, in the final
analysis, like / Vitelhmi — is the story of ascesis, of renunciation, and, (how-
ever you choose to interpret the term) of salvation. The beauty and the
rigor of its construction proceed this time from the perfect economy of its
constituent episodes. Each of them, as I have said earlier, exists by and for
itself, unique and colorful as an event, but now each belongs to an order of
things that never fails to reveal itself in retrospect as having been absolutely
necessary. As she goes from hope to hope, plumbing enroute the depths of
betrayal, contempt, and poverty, Cabiria follows a path on which every
halt readies her for the stage ahead. When one stops and reflects, one rea-
lizes that there is nothing in the film, before the meeting with the benefactor
of the tramps (whose irruption into the film seems at first sight to be no
more than a characteristic piece of FelHnian bravura), which is not proved
subsequently to be necessary to trick Cabiria into making an act of ill-
placed faith; for if such men do exist, then every miracle is possible and
we, too, will be without mistrust when Perier appears.
I do not intend to repeat what has been written about Fellini's mes-
sage. It has, anyway, been noticeably the same since / VitellonL This is
not to be taken as a sign of sterflity. On the contrary, while variety is the
mark of a "director." it is unity of inspiration that connotes the tnie
86
Cabiria
■'author/' But in the light of this new masterpiece maybe I can still at-
tempt to throw a little more light on what in essence is Fellini's style.
A Realism of Appearances
It is absurd, preposterous even, to deny him a place among the neo-
realists. Such a judgment could only be possible on ideological grounds.
It is true that Fellini's realism though social in origin is not social in intent.
This remains as individual as it is in Chekhov or Dostoievsky, Realism,
let me repeat, is to be defined not in terms of ends but of means, and
neorealism by a specific kind of relationship of means to ends. What De
Sica has in common with Rossellini and Fellini is obviously not the deep
meaning of their films — even if, as it happens, these more or less coincide
— but the pride of place they all give to the representation of realily at the
expense of dramatic structures. To put it more precisely, the Italian cinenn
has replaced a "realism" deriving in point of content from the naturalism
of novels and structurally from theater with what, for brevity's sake, we
shall call "phenomenological" realism which never "adjusts" reality to
meet the needs imposed by psychology or drama. The relation between
meaning and appearance having been in a sense inverted, appearance
is always presented as a unique discovery, an almost documentary revela-
tion that retains its full force of vividness and detail. Whence the director's
art lies in the skill with which he compels the event to reveal its meaning —
or at least the meaning he lends it — without removing any of its ambig-
uity.* Thus defined, neorealism is not the exclusive property of any one
ideology nor even of any one ideal, no more than it excludes any other
ideal — no more, in point of fact, than reality excludes anything.
I even tend to view Fellini as the director who goes the farthest of
any to date in this neorealist asethetic, who goes even so far that he goes
all the way through it and finds himself on the other side.
Let us consider how free Fellini's direction is from the encumbrances
* For Bazin's use of the term "ambiguity," see the Introduction.
87
What Is Cinema?
of psychological after-effects. His characters are never defined by their
"character" but exclusively by their appearance. I deliberately avoid the
world "behavior" because its meaning has become too restricted; the way
people behave is only one element in the knowledge we have of them. We
know them by many other signs, not only their faces, of course, but by
the way they move, by everything that makes the body the outer shell
of the inner man — even more, perhaps, by things still more external than
these, things on the frontier between the individual and the world, things
such as haircut, moustache, clothing, eye glasses (the one prop that Fel-
lini has used to a point where it has become a gimmick). Then, beyond
that again, setting, too, has a role to play — not, of course, in an expres-
sionistic sense but rather as establishing a harmony or a disharmony be-
tween setting and character. 1 am thinking in particular of the extraordi-
nary relationship established between Cabiria and the unaccustomed set-
tings into which Nazzari inveigles her, the nightclub and the luxurious
apartment.
On the Other Side of Things
But it is here that we reach the boundaries of realism, here, too, that
Fellini, who drives on further still, takes us beyond them. It is a little as
if, having been led to this degree of interest in appearances, we were now
to see the characters no longer among the objects but, as if these had be-
come transparent, through them. I mean by this that without our noticing
the world has moved from meaning to analogy, then from analogy to
identification with the supernatural. I apologize for this equivocal word;
the reader may replace it with whatever he will — "poetry" or "surreahsm"
or "magic" — whatever the term that expresses the hidden accord which
things maintain with an invisible counterpart of which they are, so to
speak, merely the adumbration.
Let us take one example from among many others of this process of
"supernaturalization," which is to be found in the metaphor of the angel.
From his first films, Fellini has been haunted by the angelizing of his char-
acters, as if the angelic state were the ultimate referent in his universe, the
88
Cabiria
final measure of being. One can trace this tendency in its explicit develop-
ment at least from / Vitelloni oa: Sordi dresses up for the carnival as a
guardian angel; a little later on what Fabrizi steals, as if by chance, is the
carved wooden statue of an angel. But these allusions are direct and con-
crete. Subtler stUl, and all the more interesting because it seems uncon-
scious, is the shot in which the monk who has come down from working in
a tree loads a long string of little branches on his back. This detail is nothing
more than a nice "realistic" touch for us, perhaps even for Fellini himself,
until at the end of // Bidone we see Antonio dying at the side o( the road:
in the white light of dawn he sees a procession of children and women bear-
ing bundles of sticks on their backs: angels pass! I must note, too, how in
the same film Picasso races down a street and the tails of his raincoat
spread out behind him hke little wings. It is that same Richard Basehart
again who appears before Gelsoniina as if he were weightless, a dazzling
sight on his high wire under the spotlights.
There is no end to Fellini's symbolism. Certainly, it would be possible
to study the whole body of his work from this one angle.* What needed to
be done was simply to place it within the context of the logic of neorealism,
for it is evident that these associations of objects and characters which con-
stitute Fellini's universe derive their value and their importance from real-
ism alone — or, to put it a better way, perhaps, from the objectivity with
which they are recorded. It is not in order to look like an angel that the
friar carries his bundles of sticks on his back, but it is enough to see the
wing in the twigs for the old monk to be transformed into one. One might
say that Fellini is not opposed to realism, any more than he is to neoreal-
ism, but rather that he achieves it surpassingly in a poetic reordering of the
worid.
A Revolution in Narrative
Fellini creates a similar revolution at the narrative level. From this point
of view, to be sure, neorealism is also a revolution in form which comes
to bear on content. For example, the priority which they accord incident
* See the article by Dominique Aubier in Cahiers du Cinema, No. 49.
89
over plot has led De Sica and Zavattini to replace plot as such with a
microaction based on an infinitely divisible attention to the complexities
in even the most ordinary of events. This in itself rules out the slightest
hierarchy, whether psychological, dramatic, or ideological, among the in-
cidents that are portrayed. This does not mean, of course, that the director
is obliged to renounce all choice over what he is to show us, but it does
mean that he no longer makes the choice in reference to some pre-existing
dramatic organization. In this new perspective, the important sequence
can just as well be the long scene that ''serves no purpose" by traditional
screenplay standards.*
Nonetheless — this is true even of Vmberto D, which perhaps rep-
resents the limits of experimentation in this new dramaturgy — ^the evolu-
tion of film follows an invisible thread. Fellini, I think, brings the neoreal-
ist revolution to its point of perfection when he introduces a new kind of
script, the scenario lacking any dramatic linking, based as it is, to the
exclusion of all else, on the phenomenological description of the charac-
ters. In the films of Fellini, the scenes that estabUsh the logical relations,
the significant changes of forhine, the major points of dramatic articula-
tion, only provide the continuity Imks, while the long descriptive se-
quences, seeming to exercise no effect on the unfolding of the "action"
proper, constitute the truly important and revealing scenes. In / Vhelloni.
these arc the nocturnal walks, the senseless strolls on the beach; in La
Strada, the visit to the convent; in II Bidone, the evening at the nightclub
or the New Year's celebration. It is not when they are doing something
specific that Fellini's characters best reveal themselves to the viewer but
by their endless milling around.
If there are, still, tensions and climaxes in the films of Fellini which
leave nothing to be desired as regards drama or tragedy, it is because, in
the absence of traditional dramatic causality, the incidents in his films de-
velop effects of analogy and echo, Fellini's hero never reaches the final
crisis (which destroys him and saves him) by a progressive dramatic linking
but because the circumstances somehow or other affect him, build up in-
* This is true of the sequence that has been deleted from the film.
90
Cabiria
side him like the vibrant energy in a resonating body. He does not de-
velop; he is transformed; overturning finally like an iceberg whose center
of buoyancy has shifted unseen.
Eye to Eye
By way of conclusion, and to compress the disturbing perfection of Le
Notti di Cabiria into a single phrase, I would like to analyze the final shot
of the film, which strikes me, when everything else is taken into account, as
the boldest and the most powerful shot in the whole of Fellini's work.
Cabiria, stripped of everything — her money, her love, her faith — emptied
now of herself, stands on a road without hope. A group of boys and girls
swarm into the scene singing and dancing as they go, and from the depths
of her nothingness Cabiria slowly returns to life; she starts to smile again;
soon she is dancing, too. It is easy to imagine how artificial and symbolic
this ending would have been, casting aside as it does all the objections of
verisimilitude, if Fellini had not succeeded in projecting his film onto a
higher plane by a single detail of direction, a stroke of real genius that
forces us suddenly to identify with his heroine. Chaplin's name is often men-
tioned in conection with La Sirada, but I have never thought the compari-
son between Gelsomina and Chariie (which I find hard to take in itself)
very convincing. The first shot which is not only up to Chaplin's level but
the true equal of his best inventions is the final shot of Le Notti di Cabiria,
when Giulietta Masina turns toward the camera and her glance crosses
ours. As far as I know, Chaplin is the only man in the history of film who
made successful systematic use of this gesture, which the books about film-
making are unanimous in condemning. Nor would it be in place if when she
looked us in the eye Cabiria seemed to come bearing some ultimate truth.
But the finishing touch to this stroke of directorial genius is this, that Cabi-
ria's glance falls several times on the camera without ever quite coming to
rest mere. The lights go up on this marvel of ambiguity. Cabiria is doubt-
less still the heroine of the adventures which she has been living out before
91
what Is Cinema?
us, somewhere behind that screen, but here she is now inviting us, too, with
her glance to follow her on the road to which she is about to return. The
invitation is chaste, discreet, and indefinite enough that we can pretend to
think that she means to be looking at somebody else. At the same time,
though, it is definite and direct enough, too, to remove us quite finally
from our role of spectator.
92
IN DEFENSE OF ROSSELLINI
A letter to Guido Aristarco, editor-in-chief
of Cinema Nuovo
My dear Aristarco,
I have been raeamng to write these comments for some time now, but
month after month I have deferred domg so, put off by the importance of
the problem and its many ramifications. I am also aware that I lack theo-
retical preparation, as compared with the seriousness and thoroughness
with which Italian critics on the left devote themselves to the study of neo-
reallsm in depth. Although I welcomed neorealism on its first arrival in
France and have ever since continued to devote to it the unstinting best of
my critical attentions, 1 cannot claim to have a coherent theory to rival
your own, nor can I pretend to be able to situate the phenomenon of neo-
realism in the history of Italian culture as surely as you can. If you take
into account, too, the fact that I am bound to look absurd if I try to instruct
Italians in their own cinema, you will have the major reasons why I have
failed as yet to respond to your invitation to discuss in the pages of Cinema
Nuovo the critical position which you and your associates have taken on
some recent films.
I would like to remind you, before getting to the heart of the dis-
cussion, that differences of opinion due to nationality are frequent even
93
What Is Cinema?
among critics of the same generation whom all else would seem to align.
We of Cahiers du Cinema, for example, have experienced this with the
staff of Sight and Sound, and I am not ashamed to admit that it was at
least in part the high regard in which Lindsay Anderson held Jacques
Becker's Casque d'or (which was a failure in France) that led me to re-
consider my own view and to see virtues in the film which had escaped me.
It is true that the judgment of a foreigner is apt sometimes to go astray be-
cause of a lack of familiarity with the context from which a film comes.
For example, the success outside France of films by Duvivier or Pagnol is
clearly the result of a misunderstanding. Foreign critics admire in these
films a picture of France which seems to them "wonderfully typical," and
they confuse this "exoticism" with the value of these films as film. 1 recog-
nize that these differences are of little consquence and I presume that the
success abroad of some Italian films which I think you are right to hold
in low esteem is based on the same kind of misunderstanding. Neverthe-
less, I do not think that this is true of the films that have caused us to dis-
agree, nor even with neorealism in general
To begin with, you will allow that French critics were not wrong, at
the very outset, in being more enthusiastic than Italian critics about the
films that today are the undisputed glory of the Italian cinema on both
sides of the Alps. For my part, I flatter myself that I was one of the few
French critics who always linked the rebirth of Italian cinema to "neo-
realism," even at the time when it was fashionable to say that the term was
meaningless. Today I still think it the best term there is to designate what is
best and most creative in Italian cinema.
But this is also why I am disturbed by the way in which you defend it.
Do I dare suggest, dear Aristarco, that the harsh line taken by Cinema
Nuovo against certain tendencies in neorealism which you consider re-
gressive prompts me to fear that you are thereby unwittingly putting the
knife to what is most alive and rich in your cinema? I am eclectic enough in
what I most admire in Italian cinema, but you have passed some harsh
judgments which I am prepared to accept: you are an Italan. I can under-
stand why the success in France of Pane. Amore e Fantasie annoys you;
your reaction resembles mine to Duvivier's films on Paris. But, on the
94
In Defense of RosseUim
other hand, when I find you hunting for fleas in Gelsomina's tousled hair,
or dismissing Rossellini's last film as less than nothing I am forced to con-
clude that under the guise of theoretical integrity you are in the process of
nipping in the bud some of the liveliest and most promising oSshoots of
vvhat I persist in calling neorealism.
You tell me you are amazed at the relative success which Viaggio in
Italia has had in Paris, and even more so by the abnost unanimous en-
thusiasm of the French critics for it. As for Strada, you are well aware
what a success it has been. These two films have come just at the right mo-
ment to restore Italian cinema not only in the interest of the general public
but also in the esteem of the intellectuals — for interest in Italian film has
flagged in the past year or two. The reasons for their success are in many
ways very different. Nevertheless, far from their having been felt here as
a break with neorealism and stiU less as a regression, they have given us a
feeling of a creative inventiveness deriving directly from the spirit which
informs the Italian school. I will try to tell you why.
But I have first to confess to a strong dislike for a notion of neorealism
which is based, to the exclusion of aU else, on what is only one of its present
aspects, for this is to submit its future potential to a priori restrictions.
Perhaps I dislike it so because 1 haven't enough of a head for theory. I
think, however, that it is because I prefer to allow art its natural freedom.
In sterile periods theory is a fruitful source for the analysis of the causes
of the drought, and it can help to create the conditions necessary for the
rebirth. But when we have had the good fortune to witness the wonderful
flowering of Italian cinema over the past ten years, is there not more dan-
ger than advantage to be gained if we try to lay down a law which we say
is imposed by theory? Not that we do not have to be strict. On the con-
trary, an exacting and rigorous criticism is needed — now more than ever,
I think. But its concern should be to denounce commercial compromise,
demagoguery, the lowering of the level of the ambitions, rather than to
impose a priori aesthetic standards on artists. As I view it, a director
whose aesthetic ideals are close to your own but who sets to work assum-
ing that he can include only 10 or 20 per cent of these ideals in any com-
mercial script he may happen to shoot has less merit than a man who for
95
What Is Cinema?
better or worse makes films that conform to his ideal, even if his concept
of neorealism differs from yours. In the first of these two fikns, now, you
are content objectively to record that the film is at least in part free of com-
promise by according it two stars in your critiques, but you consign the
second fihn to your aesthetic hell, without right of appeal.
In your view RosseUini would, doubtless, be less to blame if he had
made something like Stazione Termini or Umberto D rather than Gio-
vanna d'Arco al rogo or La Paura. It is not my intention to defend the
author of Europa 5/ at the expense of Lattuada or De Sica; the policy of
compromise is defensible, up to a point; I am not going to try to define it
here, but it does seem to me that Rossellini's independence gives his work
— whatever one may think of it on other grounds — an integrity of style and
a moral unity only too rare in cinema, which compel us to esteem it even
before we admire it.
But it is not on such methodological grounds as these that I hope to
defend hhn. Instead, I will direct my argument on his behalf at the assump-
tions on which the discussion is based. Has RosseUini ever really been a
neorealist and is he one still? It would seem to me that you admit that he
has been a neorealist. How indeed can there be any question of the role
played by Rofna Ciltd, A perta and Paisa in the origin and development of
neorealism? But you say that a certain "regression" is already apparent in
Allemania Anno Zero, that it is decisive beginning with Stromboli and /
Fioretti di San Francisco, and that it has become catastrophic in Europa
51 and Viaggio in Italia.
But what is it, in essence that you find to blame in this aesthetic itin-
erary? Increasingly less concern for social realism, for chronicling the
events of daily life, in favor, it is not to be denied, of an increasingly ob-
vious moral message — a moral message that, depending on the degree of
his malevolence, a person may identify with either one of the two major
tendencies in Italian politics. I refuse to allow the discussion to descend to
this dubious level. Even if RosseUini had in fact Christian-Democrat lean-
mgs (and of this there is no proof, public or private, so far as I know) this
would not be enough to exclude him a priori from the possibUity of being a
neorealist artist. But let that pass.
It is true, nonetheless, that one does have a right to reject the moral
96
In Defense of Rossellird
or spiritual postulate that is incieasingly evident in his work, but even so to
reject this would not imply rejection of the aesthetic framework within
which this message is manifest unless the films of RosseUini were in fact
films a these, that is, unless they were mere dramatizations of a priori
ideas. But in point of fact there is no Italian director in whose work aims
and form are more closely linked and it is precisely on this basis that I
would characterize Rossellini's neoreaJism.
If the word has any meaning — whatever the differences that arise over
its interpretation, above and beyond a rninimal agreement — ^in the first
place it stands in opposition to the traditional dramatic systems and also
to the various other known kinds of realism in literature and film with
which we are familiar, through its claim that there is a certain "whole-
ness" to reality. I borrow this definition, which I consider to be as correct
as it is convenient, from Amedee Ayfre (Cahiers du Cinema, No. 17).
Neorealism is a description of reality conceived as a whole by a conscious-
ness disposed to see things as a whole. Neorealism contrasts with the realist
aesthetics that preceded it, and in particular with naturalism and verism,
in that its realism is npt so much concerned with the choice of subject as
with a particular way of regarding things. If you like, what is realist in
Pcdsa is the Italian Resistance, but what is neorealist is Rossellini's direc-
tion— his presentation of the events, a presentation which is at once eUiptic
and synthetic.
To put it still another way, neorealism by definition rejects analysis,
whether political, moral, psychological, logical, or social, of the charac-
ters and their actions. It looks on reality as a whole, not incomprehensible,
certainly, but inseparably one. This is why neorealism, although not ne-
cessarily antispectacular (though spectacle is to all intents and purposes
alien to it) is at least basically antitheatrical in the degree that stage acting
presupposes on the part of the actor a psychological analysis of the emo-
tions to which a character is subject and a set of expressive physical signs
that symbolize a whole range of moral categories.
This does not at all mean that neorealism is limited to some otherwise
indefinable "documentarism."* RosseUini is fond of saying that a love not
* "Documentarism" according to A. Ayfre is an "attitude supposedly of
passivity that claims to be impersonally objective." — ^TR.
97
What Is Cinema?
only for his characters but for the real world just as it is lies at the heart
of his conception of the way a film is to be directed, and that it is precisely
this love that precludes him from putting asunder what reality has joined
together, namely, the character and the setting. Neorealism, then, is not
characterised by a refusal to take a stand vis-a-vis the world, still less by a
refusal to judge it; as a matter of fact, it always presupposes an attitude of
mind: it is always reality as it is visible through an artist, as refracted by
his consciousness — but by his consciousness as a whole and not by his
reason alone or Ms emotions or his beliefs — and reassembled from its dis-
tinguishable elements. I would put it this way: the traditional realist artist
— Zola, for example — -analyzes reality into parts which he llien reassem-
bles in a synthesis the final determinant of which is his moral conception
of the world, whereas the consciousness of the neorealist director filters
reality. Undoubtedly, his consciousness, like that of everyone else, does
not admit reality as a whole, but the selection that does occur is neither
logical nor is it psychological; it is ontological, in the sense that the image
of reality it restores to us is still a whole — just as a black-and-white
photograph is not an image of reality broken down and put back togedier
again "without the color" but rather a true imprint of reality, a kind of
luminous mold in which color simply does not figure. There is ontological
identity between the object and its photographic image.
I may perhaps make myself better understood by an example — from
Viaggio in Italia. Admittedly the public is easily disappointed by the film
in that the Naples which it depicts is incomplete. This reality is only a small
part of the reality that might have been shown, but the little one sees —
statues in a museum, pregnant women, an excavation at Pompeii, the tail-
end of the procession of Saint Janilarius — has the quality of wholeness
which in my view is essential It is Naples "filtered" through the conscious-
ness of the heroine. If the landscape is bare and confined, it is because the
consciousness of an ordinary bourgeoise itself suffers from great spiritual
poverty. Nevertheless, the Naples of the film is not false (which it could
easily be with the Naples of a documentary three hours long). It is rather
a mental landscape at once as objective as a straight photograph and as
subjective as pure personal consciousness. We realize now that the attitude
98
In Defense of Rossellini
which Rossellini takes toward his characters and their geographical and
social setting is, at one remove, the attitude of his heroine toward Naples —
the difference being that his awareness is that of a highly cultured artist and,
in my opinion, an artist of rare spiritual vitality.
I apologize for proceeding by way of metaphor, but I am not a philos-
opher and I cannot convey my meaning any more directly. I will therefore
attempt one more comparison. 1 will say this of the classical forms of art and
of traditional realism, that they are built as houses are built, with bricks
or cut stones. It is not a matter of calling into question either the utility of
these houses or the beauty they may or may not have, or the perfect suit-
ablity of bricks to the building of houses. The reality of the brick lies less
in its composition than it docs in its form and its strength. It would never
enter your head to define it as a piece of clay; its peculiar minerai compo-
sition matters little. What does count is that it have the right dimensions,
A brick is the basic unit of a house. That this is so is proclaimed by its ap-
pearance. One can apply the same argument to the stones of which a
bridge is constructed. They fit together perfectly to form an arch. But the
big rocks that lie scattered in a ford are now and ever will be no more than
mere rocks. Their reality as rocks is not affected when, leaping from one to
another, I use them to cross the river. If the service which they have ren-
dered is the same as that of the bridge, it is because I have brought my
share of ingenuity to bear on their chance arrangement; I have added the
motion which, though it alters neither their nature nor their appearance,
gives them a provisional meaning and utility. In the same way, the neo-
realist film has a meaning, but it is a posteriori, to the extent that it permits
our awareness to move from one fact to another, from one fragment of
reality to the next, whereas in the classical artistic composition the mean-
ing is established a priori: the house is already there in the brick.
If my analysis is correct, it follows that the term neorealism should
never be used as a noun, except to designate the neorealist directors as a
body. Neorealism as such does not exist. There are only neorealist direc-
tors— whether they be materialists, Christians, Communists, or whatever.
Visconti is neorealistic in La Terra Trema, a call to social revolt, and
Rossellini is neorealistic in / Fioretti, a film which lights up for us a purely
99
What Is Cinema?
spiritual reality. I will only deny the qualification neorealist to the director
who, to persuade me, puts asunder what reality has joined together.
In my view, then, Viaggio in Italia is neorealist — ^more so than UOro di
NapoU, for example, which I greatly admire but whose realism is basically
psychological and subtly theatrical, despite the many realistic touches that
aim to take us in.
I would go even further and claim that of all Italian directors Rossellini
has done the most to extend the frontiers of the neorealist aesthetic. I have
said that there is no such thing as pure neoreaUsm. The neoreaUst attitude
is an ideal that one can approach to a greater or lesser degree. In all films
termed neorealist there are traces still of traditional realism — spectacular,
dramatic, or psychological. They can all be broken down into the follow-
ing components: documentary reality plus something else, this something
else being the plastic beauty of the images, the social sense, or the poetry,
the comedy and so on. You would look in vain in the works of Rossellini
for some such distinction of event and intended effect. There is nothmg in
his films that belongs to literature or to poetry, not even a trace of "the
beautiful" in the merely pleasing sense of the word. Rossellini directs facts.
It is as if his characters were haunted by some demon of movement. His
little brothers of Saint Francis seem to have no better way of glorifying God
than to run races. And what of the haunting death march of the little ur-
chin in Allemama Anno Zerol Gesture, change, physical movement con-
stitute for Rossellini the essence of human reality. This means, too, that his
characters are more apt to be affected by the settings through which they
move than the settings are liable to be affected by their movement.
The world of RosseUini is a world of pure acts, unimportant in them-
selves but preparing the way (as if unbeknownst to God himself) for the
sudden dazzling revelation of their meaning. Thus it is with the miracle of
Viaggio in Italia: unseen by the two leading characters, almost unseen
even by the camera, and in any case ambiguous (for Rossellini does not
claim Aat it is a miracle but only the noise and crowd movements that
people are in the habit of calling a miracle), its impact on the consciousness
of the characters is such, nonetheless, as to prompt the unexpected out-
pouring of their love for one another.
100
In Defense of Rossellini
To my mind, no one has been more successful in creating the aesthetic
structure which in consequence of its strength, wholeness, and transpar-
ency is better suited to the direction of events than the author of Europa
57 ; the structure which Rossellini has created allows the viewer to see no-
thing but the event itself. This brings to mind the way in which some bodies
can exist in either an amorphous or a crystalline state. The art of Rossellini
consists in knowing what has to be done to confer on the facts what is at
once their most substantial and their most elegant shape — not the most
graceful, but the sharpest in outline, the most direct, or the most tren-
chant. Neorealism discovers in Rossellini the style and the resources of ab-
straction. To have a regard for reality does not mean that what one does
in fact is to pile up appearances. On the contrary, it means that one strips
the appearances of all that is not essential, in order to get at the totality in
its simplicity. The art of Rossellini is linear and melodic. True, several of
his fihns make one think of a sketch: more is implicit in the line than it
actually depicts. But is one to attribute such sureness of line to poverty of
invention or to laziness? One would have to say the same of Matisse. Per-
haps Rossellini is more a master of line than a painter, more a short-story
writer than a novelist. But there is no hierarchy of gem:es, only of artists.
I do not expect to have convinced you, my dear Aristarco. In any
event, it is never with arguments that one wins over a person. The con-
viction one puts into them often counts for more. I shall be satisfied if just
my conviction (in which you will find an echo of the admiration [for Ros-
sellini] of several of my critic colleagues) serves at least to stimulate your
own.
101
THE MYTH OF MONSIEUR VERDOUX
THE ONLY evidence for the indictment and sentencing of Landru (whom
a soft-hearted and equivocal popular mythology had promoted to the title
of Sire de Gambais) and the sole exhibit that led to his conviction was a
small pocket account book. In it he jotted down his expenses with metic-
ulous, detailed conscientiousness. There was recorded, opposite the entry
of each final, conjugal trip to the little Norman town where he owned a
quiet country house, the cost of two railroad tickets — one a round-trip
ticket and the other a one-way. Clearly, from this to an inference of pre-
meditation was but a single step. The faux-pas cost Landru his head, and
thus we see that there is a boundary beyond which method and system can
place their creator in jeopardy. It was Landru 's sang-froid that was his un-
doing. Had he attached no greater importance to the crime than to his
laundry or his grocery bill, he would perhaps have simply entered the
modest expenses of his murders in some general housekeeping book. This
concern for perfection in his makeup was to result in the one tiny imper-
fection in an otherwise perfect crime. He had either to give up the idea of
a perfectly kept expense account, or waste the price of a return trip. The
truth is, moreover, that Landru lacked the modicum of imagination or
sensitivity that would have allowed him to pursue peacefully an honorable
craftsman's trade.
Even if there had only been this one detail to go by, we could not have
102
The Myth of Monsieur Verdowc
compared Landru and Verdoux. A mania for keeping accounts argues
a touch of meanness. The mind of Monsieur Verdoux is broader and freer.
The perfect precision he brought to his ciimes made it impossible to put a
finger on him, but it did not rule out a touch of fantasy and of the spirit of
adventure.
Besides, he played the stock exchange. No reckless entry in a cook's
notebook would cost him his head — only a financial event of world-wide
importance. Almost wiped out by the Wall Street crash and devaluation,
reduced to the same conditions as our luckless small investors, but still able
to keep his end up, even at the cost of some skimping, Verdoux decides
one night that he has had enough. The police do not arrest him — he gives
himself up, and in a short while we will see how and why.
It is easy to foresee what people will find to criticize in Monsieur Ver-
doux. There is a fairly complete list of them in an article in La Revue des
Temps Modernes which goes about as far as anything could in misrep-
resentation. The author of the critique expresses herself as profoundly dis-
appointed by Chaplin's work because to her it seems ideologically, psy-
chologically, and aesthetically incoherent. "Monsieur Verdoux's crimes
are dictated neither by a need for self-defense nor in order to repair in-
justices, nor by a deep ambition, nor by the desire to improve anything in
the world around him. It is a sad thing to have expended so much energy
and proved absolutely nothing, to have succeeded in producing neither a
comedy nor a film with social implications, and to have beclouded the most
important issues."
A remarkable misconstruction, thanks to which Monsieur- Verdoux
will remain a closed book to three-quarters of the public. For what have
we here — a comedy or a fihn d these? Is its purpose to prove or even to
explain anything? Marxists condemn Chaplin for his pessimism and for
aol clearly formulating the message they felt he owed them ever smce the
tilm Modern Times. Thus literary and political distortion join hands.
TTiose in favor of a classical art with a psychological foundation find them-
selves in agreement with the political-minded while both arc blind to the
wonderful necessity of Monsieur Verdoux — that of myth.
The moment one includes Monsieur Verdoux in the Chaplin myth
103
everything becomes dear, ordered, crystallized. Before any "character"
and before the coherent, rounded-off life story that novelists and play-
wrights call fate, there exists a person called Charlie, He is a black-and-
white form printed on the silver nitrate of film. This form is human enough
to grip us and encourage our interest and sympathy. There is enough con-
tinuity of appearance and behavior about it to give its existence meaning
and to attain to the autonomous existence of what is called, not without
some ambiguity, "a character.*' I say ambiguity because the word applies
equally to a character in a novel. But Charlie is not the Princesse de
Cleves. Some day a decision must be made to rid Charlie and his pro-
gressive stages of development from those extravagant comparisons with
the evolution of Moliere by which people felt they could honor him. A
character in a novel or a play works out his destiny within the confines of
one work — we must not be misled by the saga novel which is, all things
considered, only a matter of size. Charlie, on the other hand, always tran-
scends the films in which he appears.
Andre Malraux recounts how, somewhere one Arabian night, he saw
the most marvelous Chaplin film projected onto a white wall where sleep-
ing cats lay: an odd serpent pieced out of second-hand strips of film picked
up here and there. The myth was manifested there in its purest form.
It is Felix the Cat or Mickey Mouse rather than Mohere's Misan-
thrope or Tartuffe who can throw light on the existence of Charlie. It is
true that the cinema, like the comic strip, vaudeville, the circus, or the
commedia dell'arte, has heroes standardized in appearance and posses-
sing definite characteristics whom the public likes to see week by week in
adventures which, for all their variety, are always those of the same person.
However, I think we should avoid a too hasty and superficial comparison.
We must first establish hierarchies in the degree and form of their existence.
One carmot really speak of myth short of an understanding and develop-
ment of characters. Charlie was a product of the Mack Sennett comedies,
in which he had a smaller role than Fatty Arbuckle; but there was an ex-
ceptional depth to him, the appeal of a special kind of credibility, a con-
sistency of behavior that owed nothing to psychology or to physical ab-
normality, a magical radiance in his glance differentiating him from the
104
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
marionettes that surrounded him — and all of this foreshadowed a special
destiny. In less than fifteen years, the little fellow with the ridiculous cut-
away coat, the little trapezoid moustache, the cane, and the bowler hat,
had become part of the consciousness of mankind. Never since the world
began had a myth been so universally accepted.
I have no desire to undertake the exegesis of this myth, which would
require a dismayingly large number of references ranging from the per-
sonal psychoanalysis of Charleys Spencer Chaplin to universal symbolism,
by way of Jewish mythology and various hypotheses about coo temporary
civilization. I doubt, with so short a historical perspective to go by, whether
we can yet form a coherent and over>aU view of Charlie. Condensed in
him, as the psychoanalysts say, is too much sensitivity: too many collec-
tive unconsciousnesses are stored up inside him, providing opportunities
for secret and powerful interassimilations, for formidable stratified mytho-
logical overlays, for archetypal upheavals, for mutations of meaning as
yet beyond our grasp. But it is sufficient for my purpose to point out in
Charlie a few constant factors, and also a few of the variants: to follow
along paths taken by his character and to suggest, in the absence of a
master key, three or four clues that are generally acceptable. I will be at
pains above all not to lose sight of the fact that we are faced with a mytho-
logical process and to order my criticism accordingly.
If Verdoux has a "meaning," why look for it in terms of some moral,
political, or social ideology or other, or even in reference to psychological
categories that we are in the habit of seeing as revealed in the characters of
our theater or our novels, when it is so easy to discover it in Charlit?
The critic quoted above attacks Chaplin's performance, accusing him
of failing to escape altogether from the comic format of his former charac-
ter, of hesitating, not choosing one way or another, between the realistic
interpretation that the role of Verdoux demands and the conventions of a
"Charlie." The fact is that in this instance realism would add up to illusion.
Charlie is always there as if superimposed on Verdoux, because Verdoux
is Charlie. It is important that at the right moment the public should recog-
nize him without any shadow of a doubt; and this wonderful moment ar-
rives in the final shot when Verdoux, alias Charlie, goes off in shirtsleeves
105
What Is Cinema?
between the executioners. Verdoux, or CharMe disguised as his, opposite!
There is no feature oi the former character that is not turned inside out like
the fingers of a glove. No ridiculous cutaway, no bowler, no outsize boots,
no bamboo cane, rather a dapper suit, a broad, gray, silk tie, a soft felt hat,
a gold-handled cane. The tiny trapezoid moustache, his supremely dis-
tinctive mark, has disappeared. The social positions of Charlie and Ver-
doux are radically different: Charlie, even when he is a millionaire, remains
the eternal beggar; Verdoux is a rich man. When it is Charlie's moment to
marry, it is always with dreadful termagants who terrorize him and squeeze
the last penny of his pay out of him. The polygamous Verdoux is always
unfaithful to his wives, forces them into submission, murders them, and
lives off their money (except for the young woman in ill health and the one
he decides not to poison — but we will deal with these exceptions later).
Furthermore, Charlie obviously has an inferiority complex vis-a-vis the
opposite sex while Verdoux plays Don Juan and succeeds at it. The
Charlie of The Gold Rush is soft-hearted and na'ive; Verdoux is a cynic.
No matter into how many elements you break Charlie down there is not
one whose opposite you will not find in Verdoux.
Let us sum up all these characteristics in a single one, Charlie is es-
sentially a socially unadapled person; Verdoux is super adapted. By re-
versing the character, the whole Chaplin universe is turned upside down
at one stroke. The relations of Charlie with society (along with women,
the fundamental and permanent theme of his work) have all switched their
value. For example the police who terrorize Charlie are easily tricked by
Verdoux. Far from running from the cops, Verdoux eludes them without
having to stay out of their way, and when the game has gone on long
enough and he decides to give himself up to one or more of them, it will
be the police who are scared. But the scene is worth recounting. One night,
Verdoux, aging and penniless, meets the young ^rl he had spared and
even helped out of a difficult spot. Grateful to him and anxious on her part
to do him a good turn, she takes him into a cabaret. She is now a rich
woman, married to an arms manufacturer — a sweet man in spite of that,
she says. Is it this final disappointment, is it weariness, or does he think
that die time has arrived to put an end to it aU? Verdoux pretends with
106
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
friendly sincerity to accept the help offered him but after leaving the young
woman he returns to the nightclub where, in passing, he had spotted the
relatives of one of his victims. They have recognized him. He knows they
have telephoned the police and that in a minute or two they will arrive. It
would be easy to summon a taxi, but instead he returns calmly and finds
himself face to face with the enemy, an old woman and her nephew. He
does a quick feint and manages to lock them in an alcove near the cloak-
room. The police arrive on the -^cene, a crowd starts to form in front of the
locked door through which we can hear shouting. The police stand there
open-mouthed, and alongside them is Verdoux, who could still escape
without attracting attention. But no. He remains, curious and impassive.
The door is forced open but there is naturally no murderer inside. The
terrified old woman, half-fainting, comes to her senses — face to face with
Verdoux. She faints away a second time, this time into Verdoux's arms
while he, embarrassed, hands her to a cop. The scene is repeated several
times until finally, overcoining her fright, the old lady manages to de-
nounce him, indicating him with her finger. Paralyzed with astonishment,
the incredulous policeman asks, "Could you be Monsieur Verdoux?'* ''At
your service,"' he replies, giving a little bow. Before hastening to handcuff
him, the representative of law and order wavers and hesitates, himself
within an ace of fainting.
Let the reader put himself, for a moment, in the policeman's place.
From the instant Charlie was bom (yet how can you measure his existence
by time?) society has directed its police force to drive him out of its bosom.
The cops have been used to charging after him at street comers, on de-
serted wharfs, in public squares after closing time. His awkward and preci-
pitous flight has always indicated a vague sense of self-confessed guilt, the
condign punishment for which, moreover, is a blow from a truncheon.
Actually this little fellow with the ducklike waddle gives them little trouble.
His mischicvousness and artfulness drive him to nothing more than harm-
less little acts of revenge or to the minimum of petty thefts necessary for
survival. He was an easy victim who always eluded them at the last mo-
ment but always recognized his guilt. Then suddenly Chariie disappears!
No more recognition of guilt! Now it is society that is inflicted with a
107
What Is Cinema?
strange uneasiness: not of course that it feels guiJty, or at least it won't
admit to being guilty (that we have never seen, for society by its nature
can only accuse others.) But finally something abnormal is happening in
its bosom which causes it to be far more disturbed than by the disorder
that it ordinarily sanctions. The women who disappear, and this elusive
character to whom> if he exists, these monstrous and incomprehensible
crimes must be attributed, disturb its conscience as a society — ^not because
it is unable to prevent and punish them, but chiefly because they are of
such a kind that society vaguely senses their ambiguity. It reacts emotion-
ally with a holy wrath, and this already indicates a troubled subconscious.
Society knows it is guilty but cannot acknowledge the fact. When Mon-
sieur Verdoux explains to the tribunal that all he has done is to apply,
down to the last detail, the fundamental law of social relationships, the
received wisdom of modem life that "business is business," society of
course covers its face and cries scandal, and all the louder because the
point has gone home. Its attack on Monsieur Verdoux will be all the more
savage because it refuses to see in him a parody of society, an application
ad absurdum of its rules of the game. Contrary to K in The Trial (and
Charlie is not unrelated to him) Verdoux by his existence renders society
guilty. It does not know what of exactly, but so long as this element of
scandal survives in its bosom, the world will be sick and troubled. Un-
fortunately for society, Verdoux knows the game so well that he profits by
it to remain out of reach. He can push audacity to the point of gazing in
curiosity over the shoulder of the policeman who is looking for him. The
fright of the poor official as he turns around is understandable.
Naturally society condemns Verdoux to death. In this way it hopes to
be rid of the whole business, to wipe away totally the shocking stain on
its existence. But it cannot see that, if Verdoux has deigned to hand
himself over to justice, it is because the verdict can no longer touch him —
better still, it wiU even deal itself a blow through him. From the moment
of his arrest, Verdoux is totally indifferent to his fate. The limits of irony
are passed when he is visited in prison by a journalist and a priest and
asks the latter if there is anything he can do for him. All these final scenes
are unspeakably beautiful, not so much from perfection of dramatic form
108
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
but essentially because of the power of the situation and of the character
itself. Verdoux presides over his last hours like a Socrates and, less talka-
tive than Socrates, he holds society at bay by the mere fact of his pres-
ence. Society performs its final rite — the cigarette, the glass of rum, but
Verdoux neither smokes nor drinks. He refuses this ill-timed offer with a
mechanical gesture. Then follows one of Chaplin's most brilliant gags, a
brain wave of genuis. He changes his mind. "I have never tasted mm!"
he says, and with an air of curiosity he tastes it. The next instant there
shines through Verdoux's fugitive and bright glance, the awareness of
death. Not fear, or courage, or resignation — certainly this elementary
psychology comes into play-but something like a passivity of will which
combmes all the gravity of the moment with something that transcends
indifference, contempt, even the certainty of revenge. He alone has known
for a long time what lay ahead for society. He does not interfere with it.
Now all has been accomplished.
We see Verdoux next being led away across the prison yard in the
dawn, between two executioners. A small man in his shirt sleeves, his arms
tied behind him, he moves forward toward the scaffold with a kind of
a hop, skip, and a jump. Then comes the sublimest gag of all, unspoken
but unmistakable, the gag that resolves the whole Mm: Verdoux was
Charlie! They're going to guillotine Charlie! The fools did not recognize
him. In order to force society to commit this irreparable blunder, Char-
lie has decked out the simulacrum of his opposite. In the precise and
mythological meaning of the word, Verdoux is just an avatar of Charlie
— the chief and we may indeed say the first. As a result Monieur Verdoux
is undoubtedly the most important of Chaplin's works. When we see it,
we are seeing the first evolution of a step which could weE be, by the same
token, the final step. Monsieur Verdoux casts a new light on Chaplin's
world, sets it right and gives it a new significance. This same road to no-
where, always taken from film to film by the little fellow with the cane,
which some see as the road of the wandering Jew while others prefer to
identify it with the road of hope — now we know where it ends. It ends as
a path across a prison yard in the morning mist, through which we sense
the ridiculous shape of a guillotine.
109
What Is Cinema?
Let there be no mistake, the scandal created by the film in the United
States could well take as a pretext the obvious immorality of the character.
The truth is that society reacted to it: it sensed something implacable, like
a menace, in the serenity of Verdoux's death. It guessed, to teU the whole
truth, that Charlie at one and the same time was triumphant over it and
escaped its clutches, that he has put society forever in the wrong; for it
is not enough to say that the road ends in the scaffold: through one of his
most beautiful ellipses, Chaplin avoided showing us the finale. The blade
of the guillotine will only cut up an apparition. We seem to guess at the
existence of a double of the executed man: dressed in a white tunic, decked
out with the fluffy paper wings he wore in the dream sequence of The Kid,
Charlie escapes by superimposition, unknown to the executioners. Even
before the ludicrous deed is accomplished, CharUe is in heaven.
I amuse myself imagining Charlie's final avatar, his ultimate ad-
venture: the settling of his account with St. Peter — even if I were God the
Father, I would not feel at ease welcoming Monsieur Verdoux.
Monsieur Verdoux is Chaplin's New Testament. The Old ended with
The Gold Rush and The Circus. Between the two, the Chaplin myth seems
to be confused, troubled, uncertain. He is still trying to rely on gags and
comic bits which, however, grow fewer and fewer. The Great Dictator is
significant from this point of view. Although badly constructed, mixed up,
oddly assorted, it did have one brilliant and fortuitous justification, a setding
of accounts with Hitler, who well deserved it, for his two-fold impudence
of stealing Charlie's moustache and of raising himself to the rank of the
gods. In obliging Hitler's moustache to become again part of the Charlie
myth, Charlie wiped out the myth of the dictator. The film had to be made,
even if only for the sake of our mental satisfaction and of the due ordering
of things, but it was a chance variant in the avatars of the hero. Besides,
we clearly see a disintegration of the character in The Great Dictator, es-
pecially in one scene, at once the worst dramatically and in its conformity
with the phenomenology of the myth the most beautiful: I refer to the final
speech. In this interminable, yet (in my view) too short scene I remember
only the spellbinding tone of a voice and the most disconcerting of meta-
morphoses. Charlie's lunar mask disappears little by little, corroded by
110
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
the gradations of the panchromatic stock and betrayed by the nearness of
the camera, which intensifies the telescopic effect of the wide screen.
Underneath, as if it were a superimposition, appears the face of an al-
ready aging man, furrowed here and there by grief, his hair sprinkled with
white, the face of Charles Spencer Chaplin. The photographic psycho-
analysis of Charlie, as it were, remains certainly one of the great moments
in world cinema.
All the same, and indeed by its very beauty, it reveals an unhealthy
condition of the myth, a pernicious infection of the character, which, if
it continued, could not but destroy it utterly. Indeed, one might have ex-
pected, with some likelihood, to find nothing more in Monsieur Verdoux
than the actor (prodigious undoubtedly, but still the actor) Charles S.
Chaplin. Nothing of the sort, it was just that sickly condition which pre-
cedes moulting and the shedding of skins. Charlie was getting ready to
shed his skin. Like Jupiter planning one of his naughty escapades here on
earth, he was to return to us unrecognizable and beget on society one of
those children she would remember.
What is admirable about Monsieur Verdoux is that his activities have
a much deeper significance than those of Charlie in The Gold Rush al-
though they are of a completely opposite kind. Actually, from the first
Keystone shorts to The Gold Rush and The Circus Charhe's character
has passed through a moral and psychological evolution. The initial Char-
lie is rather naughty, kicking out right and left at the backsides of his rivals
as soon as they are no longer in a position to retaliate.
In Kid Auto Races at Venice we see him bite the nose of an inquis-
itive bystander without the slightest warning. The character gradually
improves but it is touch and go for a long whUe. Before the maternal in-
stinct he reveals in The Kid (and it is only after he has done his best to
get rid of him, that he decides to adopt the little Jackie Coogan) he has
shown little sympathy for children. In A Day's Pleasure, taking advan-
tage of the absence of witnes^s, one of those little backward kicks that
are his specialty sends flying the mint lozenges and the acid drops that
the ship's bellboy offers him. Besides, it is a regular rule of conduct with
him not to hesitate to do some mean little thing when no one is looking.
Ill
What Is Cinema?
He shams easily and is tricky to no good purpose. It would be wrong to
think that Charlie is basically good. Only love makes him so, and then
there are no limits to his generosity and courage. In Easy Street and even
in The Pilgrim we find more than one example of his naughtiness. How-
ever, these faults of his do not detract from our interest in the character
or from our sympathy. In fact, the opposite is true. These words must
be dissociated from any implied moral judgment. Being on the side of
the hero of a myth, the fact that we are both for and with him, formnately
is not uniquely dependent on the moral categories of which he may be
the embodiment. But it is a law common to the evolution of all characters
that live by virtue of intercourse with the public, that they tend to justify
our sympathy for them by greater psychological consistency and greater
moral perfection. The character of Pierrot follows the same curve. Thus
it is that in The Gold Rush Charlie has become completely good. His
misfortunes never come under the stricture of moral condemnation. On
the contrary, they make a victim out of him and stir us on occasions to
something beyond sympathy, namely to pity. Here Charlie is at the end
of a process of evolution that justifies our coming to the conclusion that
it does not represent his work at its best. As far as I am concerned, I
would rather have the rich equivocation of The Pilgrim in which his art
has not yet troubled about, or become enfeebled by, a concern for psy-
chological and moral values. In any event, The Gold Rush is the most
forceful apology for the character and most clearly calls for us to revolt
against Charlie's fate.
The Saint Verdoux of today is the dialectical answer to Saint Charlie
of The Kid, The Circus, and The Gold Rush. But in my view the indict-
ment of Charlie's enemies and the vindication provided by the character
are aU the more convincing because they are not based on any psychologi-
cal proof. We go along with Verdoux, we are for Verdoux. But how can
our sympathy be based on our moral estimate of him? On that level the
spectator too could only condemn Verdoux's cynicism. Yet we take him
as he is. It is the character that we love, not his qualities or his defects.
The audience's sympathy for Verdoux is focused on the myth, not m
what he stands for morally. So when Verdoux, with the spectator on Ws
112
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
side, is condemned by society, he is doubly sure of victory because the
spectator condemns the condenanation of a man "justly" condenmed by
society. Society no longer has any emotional claim on the public con-
science.
Monsieur Verdoux is at once a paradox and a tour de force. The Gold
Rush went straight for its goal. Verdoux takes society in the rear like a
boomerang; his triumph is in no way indebted to the ready and dubious
help of ethics. The myth is self-sufficient, it convinces by its own inner
logic. There are some theorems in geometry whose truth is only finally
established when their opposites have been proved. Monsieur Verdoux is
needed to ill out and round off Chaplin's work. Between the timid and
unhappy lover of The Gold Rush and this Don Juan past his prime, society
is completely caught up in the dialectic of the myth. The reflex action
with which it imprudently tried to get rid of the myth released the final
spring of the trap. Feeling morally and legally justified in condemning
Bluebeard to death while it had been satisfied only to jail the naive striker
of Modern Times, lo and behold society killed Charliel
It now remains to be explained precisely why Chaplin chose for Ms
daring act of defiance against society an assault on women, I have reserved
until now this aspect of the myth which I consider to be more personal and
biographical.
To begin with, this polygamous speculator harbors a touching secret:
he has a wife, a child, a hearth and home. It is in large part to supply their
needs and to keep them in quiet comfort that he is forever, up hill and
down dale, in the process of poisoning someone. His wife, his first and
only one, has become an invalid. She is frail and gentle. We learn, at the
end of the film, from the mouth of the aged Verdoux, just before he sur-
renders to the police, that she and the child are dead. Naturally we have
no proof that he didn't poison them. From the way he adds that they are
certainly "happier up above," we might even think he did. At bottom how
differently could he have treated this wife whom he loved than by killing
her for love rather than for her money as he did the others? Verdoux has
no prejudices about death; he knows what's good about it and doesn't
113
What Is Cinema?
hesitate to choose it when that's the wise thing to do. It may be that, finan^
cially mined, weary of the struggle and no longer able to assure a peaceful
existence for the one he loved, or perhaps knowing thai her suffering was
incurable, he had gently spared her the propinquity of a world against
which he could no longer defend her.
The second exception is a young women he met in the street and
brought home one night to tr>' out a new poison he had just concocted.
The young woman, believing him a good man, confides her misfortunes
to him. She wants to come to the help of the man she loves. She believes
in life because she believes in this man's love. She is battling despair with
all her might so as to save him. Touched, Verdoux exchanges the poison
for a glass of burgundy, and presses two thousand-franc notes into the
unhappy girl's hand. When, at the end of the film, he comes across her a
second time, she might have been of more effective help to him. It is not so
much material help that Verdoux now needs — ^it is not even love. Tender-
ness, affecdon, would be enough. But he must also be able to believe in the
happiness of this woman whose husband, who makes her so happy, is after
all, he now learns, just a munitions maker like the rest of them. If that night
he had met only one just person, a single woman who really deserved her
happiness, perhaps he would have done society a favor and decided not
to surrender himself into the hands of its justice.
Even under the guise of Verdoux-Bluebeard, Charlie follows and per-
fects his personal myth of the woman whom we may here call (in re-
membrance of her first embodiment) the Edna Purviance complex. At
this point I will put forward a hypothesis which does not claim to be all in-
clusive but which seems at least to explain some aspects of the character
of Verdoux in its relation both to Charlie and to Chaplin. There is no need
to have recourse to the latest subtleties of psychoanalysis to sec quite evi-
dently that Chaplin, by way of Charlie, pursues symbolically one and the
same feminine myth. Between the tender and gentle Edna Purviance, the
blind girl of City Lights, and Verdoux's frail invalid there is no noticeable
difference except that Verdoux is married to the last named. Like Char-
He, they are all unhappy human beings, ill adjusted to society, physical
or moral invalids of social life. It is this hyperfemininity which beguiles
114
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
Charlie; love's UghtniBg stroke is the cause of a shattering conversion
to the norms of society and morality. At the beginning of Easy Street,
naturally it is not the pastor's sermon but his daughter's smile that trans-
forms the miscreant into an instrument of virtue. There is one exception
to the rale: The Kid in which pseudo-paternal love takes the place of love
for a pure young girl. If we correctly interpret the symbolism of these
female characters then the whole of Charlie's work would be the ever-
renewed search for the woman capable of reconciling him to society and
by the same token to himself. The public, remembering only Charlie's
kindness and goodness, remembers only a Charlie in love. They forget that
the winnings he offers to the young immigrant girl were gained by cheat-
ing during the game. In Modern Times Charlie dreams of living an honest
and industrious life in which he returns in the evening to his petty-bour-
geois house with a good feeling of a day well spent, and finds the little
woman he loves busy getting dinner ready. Love alone can prompt his
desire, albeit blundering and comic for other reasons, not only to adapt
himself to society but one might even say to accept a moral way of living
and a psychological individualism. For the sake of Edna Purviance Char-
lie feels capable of assuming a character and a destiny: the myth becomes
a man.
In relation to this combination of events, found in almost all Charlie
movies, Verdoux represents likewise an important development. Depend-
ing on the case, a film may end, as in The Pilgrim, with the collapse of
the idyU, or, as in The Gold Rush or The Immigrant, with marriage. The
fact is, though, that the upbeat denouement should not be taken seriously.
It is brought about — and on this point a comparison with Moliere is
possible — by a dramatic reflex that is foreign to the myth. The true ending,
which the audience unconsciously reconstructs, is that of Sunnyside or of
Modern Times:, though again one might consider this absence of a de-
nouement to be an optimistic development of the undeniable failures of
love in The Pilgrim or The Circus.
For the first time in Monsieur Verdoux, we see Charlie after his mar-
riage to Edna Purviance. Maybe because he has rounded the cape of love
that, at least according to the logic of the myth, Charlie can change him-
115
What Is Cinema?
self into Verdoux, or perhaps, if you prefer, Verdoux simply had to be
married to Edna Purviance. In any case, although he is not all that re-
conciled to society, he at least knows how to make use of it. We also
know, and this is important, that he continues to respect the wife-child
myth but no longer hopes to be saved by it. Maybe, supposing we accept
the murder theory, he respects the myth even to the point of poisoning
Edna Purviance to prevent her from becoming the responsibility of life
and society.
The second young woman to be spared might conceivably represent
a more vital Edna Purviance, who refuses to die. But without knowing it,
she crosses over into the opposite camp.
We are now left with those other women, the ones who can be poi-
soned, and also those who resist on occasion — for the most important
character in the film is precisely the woman Verdoux does not manage to
kill. Chaplin, whom one can criticize after his recent films for his increas-
ing fear of talented actors, has made a fortunate choice here in Martha
Raye, the unspeakably comic termagant, the clinging woman of so many
American comedies. By asking a well-known actress, one already estab-
lished in a continuing role, to play opposite him, Charlie whether he knew
it or not wanted to set a character rather than an actor over against Ver-
doux. Hollywood's number-one pain in the neck, the nagging Martha
Raye, who could make wild beasts out of lambs and justify the acquittal
of a dozen Bluebeards, is precisely the one indestructible woman whose
capacity for resistance Verdoux cannot overcome. I am impressed by the
fact that Chaplin did not hesitate to seize on a mythology foreign to his
ovra and used a character that up to this point owed nothing to him, but
who will henceforth owe him everything.
It is Martha Raye who vindicates Verdoux in the viewer's mind. The
one murder that Chaplin deals with at length (and cleverly too) is that of
a harridan — and what's more, he fluffs it. The whole middle part of the film
is taken up by one gag of formidable dimensions, and droll beyond words:
the poisoning that didn't come off. The others are handled so artfully in
line with the Chaplin technique that our sensibilities, skillfully manipu-
lated, feel no sense of repugnance over Verdoux's activities. It is Blue-
116
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
beard, instead, for whom one feels sorry. Thus he manages to have his
revenge on women without having to sacrifice his splendid role of victim.
For here it is also doubtless a question of revenge. While Monsieur
Verdoux extends and goes beyond the myth, hitherto incomplete, of pure
love for Edna Purviance, Chaplin gives Verdoux the task of revenging him
on the other women. It might well be true to say that Charlie's feminine
ideal is more or less consciously ChapUn's own. I would be ready to see
clear indications of this in his use of these new loves of his, succeeding
Edna Purviance in the embodiment of the myth. But in private life reality
customarily gives the lie to mythological idealization. Objectively speak-
ing, the faults of the woman or of Chaplin himself are of little importance
here. It is reasonable to assume that they are there simply to justify con-
sciously a divorce which was unconsciously inevitable from the begin-
ning of the idyll. If it is the female myth not the woman that Chaplin is in
search of, then no single woman can satisfy him, and his disappointment is
all the keener in proportion as the "crystallization" of Ms initial feeling has
caused him subjectively to identify his new love with the ideal. 'The thir-
teenth woman returns as the first."
The discarded wife is not just a wife one no longer loves — she is ex-
pelled from the myth. For Chaplin-Charlie (Charlie being here Chaplin's
unconscious) she has betrayed the Edna Purviance whom Chaplin saw in
her. Thus all women are guilty save one — ^who will join the others later.
The myth of Don Juan is merged with that of Bluebeard. One may con-
sider Verdoux's murder victims to be symbols of Chaplin*s former wives,
who were likewise his wives on the screen. Not to mention that Chaplin
symbolically recoups, through Monsieur Verdoux, the alimony extorted
from him with the complicity of American society and the law by various
"Edna Purviances" who turned into "Martha Rayes" after divorcing
him.
For it was public opinion that first took upon itself to make a Blue-
beard out of Chaplin, even before he created Monsieur Verdoux. The
author of A Woman of Paris (known in French as L' Opinion publique)
was content to face up to the myth in which he was already imprisoned,
freeing himself from it by fulfilling it and justifying it symbolically. The
117
What Is Cinema?
misogyny of Chaplin finds in Verdoux both the judge and the executioner
of women. But they deserve to die because all, to one degree or another,
are guilty of betraying the hope embodied in Edna Purviance.
What could be the meaning of the formal aesthetic problems of the
narrative and the direction if, as I have tried to show, the reality of the
work resides in the symbolism of the situation and the characters? It's
clear that we cannot here apply the usual criteria of cinematic dramaturgy.
Obviously Chaplin does not build the substance of his narrative on the
basis of a skeletal scenario, of an abstract dramatic structure, even the
very substantial one of tragedy. It is this that may set one on the wrong
track or deceive one in analyzing his films. They arc only sequences of
quasi-autonomous scenes, each of which is content to exploit a situation
to the full. Think back to what you can remember of Charlie, and dozens
of scenes will come to mind as clear cut as the picture of the character
himself; but whether we are dealing with the gas lamp in Easy Street, the
sermon on David and Goliath, the papier-mache tree in Shoulder Anns,
the dance of the rolls, Charlie's capers when he is being beaten up on the
sidewalk in The Great Dictator, the dream in The Kid, or twenty other
scenes, all are sufficient unto themselves, smooth and round like an egg,
so that one might almost extrapolate them from one film to another.
Certainly it would be a mistake to put all of Chaplin's work on the same
level. The dramatic progression of The Pilgrim, for example, is admirable,
that of Easy Street enchantingly clear, but Shoulder Arms is divided into
three distinct parts which constitute, dramatically, independent films.
Even in the best-made of his films the so-called structural qualities are the
most extrinsic to them, the last by which we would determine their excel-
lence. Of course it would have been better if Chaplin had known how to
reconcile the dramatic development of a story with the development of the
situations of which it is composed, even better stiU, if this useful ordering of
succession and interrelation conveyed a more hidden order in the conceiv-
ing and developing of a gag, and, most of all, that mysterious economy
which gives the scenes, however short, tlieir spiritual density, their specific
gravity as myth and as comedy. The only serious formal criticisms that can
118
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
be leveled against a Chaplin film concern its unity of style, the unfortunate
variations in tone, the conflicts in the symbolism implicit in the situations.
From this point of view the quality of Chaplin's films since The Gold Rush
has definitely fallen off. Despite some first-rate scenes, even Modern Times
suffers from an evident lack of unity between gags.*
As for The Great Dictator, it is a collection of uneven scenes; some
of them, like the one with the artillery shell, might even pass for mediocre
reminders of the Keystone days. The grenade gag could have fitted right
into Shoulder Arms. I don't think much of the meeting between the two
dictators, which introduces a tired old custard-pie routine into a work that
contains scenes of sheer dramatic tension such as the one in which Charlie
sits and watches his house burn down. In this scene, as Jean-Louis Bar-
rault has said, the mime of despair, the choreography of anguish, find their
most perfect expression in immobility.
As a rale, this falling off in quality in Chaplin's next to last films is
attributed to a parasitic ideology. As we know, Chaplin has some pre-
tensions to being a social philosopher, and no injustice is done to the artist
to find his ideas, though appealing, also an encumbrance. Clearly Easy
Street, or for that matter The Gold Rush, do not set out to prove anything,
while there is no mistaking the purpose or theses of Modern Times, The
Great Dictator, and Monsieur Verdoux. We could willingly do without
these; but it remains to determine if they are as important as has been
alleged. In proportion as any "message" animates a character, to that
extent it displaces the myth and tends to displace the character too. The
ontology of the hero is destroyed. But thank God this destruction does not
follow as inevitably as one might suppose. The myth resists; harassed and
constrained by Chaplin's ideas, it finds in tlie genius of Chaplin himself a
* The commercial reissue of Modern Times has given me an opportunity to
quash this judgment, which was based on memory. Today, indeed, I am almost
ready to claim Modern Times as one of the best of Charlie's fall-length films —
perhaps the best, along with City Lights.
So far from lacking unity, Modern Times on the contrary is the film in which
the level of acting style is best maintained, controlling thus the style of the gags
and even of the script. The ideological significance never impinges from without
on the comic flow of the gags. It is the imperturbable logic of the latter that
utterly exposed the absurdities of our society.
119
way to escape from them, and to reappear elsewhere, perhaps even with-
out Chaplin being aware of it. But the symbolism of the character is more
complicated; we have to separate it from the relations between the charac-
ter and the situation, and also from the relation between the character and
the message. Almost every gesture, an unexpected sign of some sort,
informs us that Charlie is at last ready to treat die idea itself as a prop,
an object of some sort to be introduced into the performance. The globe
in The Great Dictator is a good example: a symbol of an idea of the most
general kind, it becomes a choreographic prop in the development of a
scene where we return to Charlie's 1916 sense of the comic. It is his way of
juggling with ideas even when they are the ideas of citizen Chaplin.
But Monsieur Verdoux does not even need any such justification as
that provided by the group of arguments I am presuming to offer m
defense of the "accused." It is difficult to know what Chaplin's ideo-
logical intentions were in conceiving this film but they have in no sense
interfered with the character since his behavior in the situations in which
he finds himself is thoroughly autonomous, coherent, and meaningful.
Hence it would be more correct to blame this on the weakening of the
myth since the making of The Gold Rush rather than the proliferation of
parasitic ideology in the scenarios of Charles Spencer Chaplin. It would be
senseless to imagine and to hope retrospectively for a prolongation of the
Charlie character, arbitrarily established at a level which we happen to
believe to be a satisfactory stage of its evolution. The hero created by
Chaplin was dependent on many factors, as various as they were decisive.
The transition from orthochromatic stock to panchromatic should itself
alone have brought on a veritable morphological disorder, more serious
perhaps than even the introduction of the spoken word; acknowledging
and revealing that the actor was aging, it ate away at the character. Try
and imagine Charlie in Technicolor! But we must also take into considera-
tion the general history of the cinema, its technical evolution, the increasing
sensitivity of the public, and, above all, Charlie's own life story, which we
have taken to be not unconnected with the mythology of his character. On
the contrary, one might be delighted at the metamorphosis of Charlie into
Verdoux so long as the latter fits in with the rebirth of a myth able to
secrete anew its ideological antitoxins.
120
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
So far from being badly put together, Monsieur Verdoux strikes me
as one of Chaplin's best-made films, thanks to the new-found vigor of the
character, to the homogeneity of the myth. Jean Renoir made no mistake.
He was doubtless the only person in Hollywood able to appreciate its
structure, completely built from within, a thoroughly workmanlike job.
Renoir himself has never been able to "construct" a scenario and for basi-
cally the same reasons. Renoir has always been more concerned with the
creation of characters and situations in which they could express them-
selves rather than with a story. There is also a Renoir mythology — obvi-
ously more diffused and spread out over many more characters — as Lm
Regie du jeu clearly shows: the only reason for the bearskin was to provide
the author-actor with an opportunity to achieve the metempsychosis of
which he dreamed. Let the scenarios cope with the bearskins! 1 have no
wish to push the comparison too far, since this could falsify the meaning
of Renoir's work, into which quite other aesthetic contradictions enter.
Yet It remains true that die director of La Fartie de campagne likewise has
always tried to direct the film in which the narrative would flow from the
characters in a given situation. Each scene in La Regie du jeu is resolved
on its own terms. We feel that it presented itself to the director as a special
case. He treats it like an autonomous organism, as the gardener treats his
rose bush. It gives me great pleasure to find a garden and roses in both
Monsieur Verdoux and Diary of a Chambermaid. These images are not
accidental, for Renoir lights up his film with the same cheerful cruelty.
We must not conclude, therefore, that Chaplin's film has no formal
structure, no narrative architecture, and that the direction consists in noth-
ing more than setting up situations. Just the opposite, in fact. To recall
what film direction owes not only to A Woman of Paris but to Charlie's
work as a whole is to repeat a truism. Monsieur Verdoux shows its origi-
nality precisely in achieving a kind of synthesis between the celebrated
psychological film directed by Chaplin and the fihns in which Charlie
appears. Whereby we clearly see that the technique of ellipsis and allusion
which was the definitive aesthetic revelation of A Woman of Paris some-
how natorally befits the character. Chaplin's method of direction consists
in carrying Charhe's performance over into the camerawork, the shooting
script, and the editing. But Chaplin's ellipsis, whether applied to space or
121
what Is Cinema?
time> is not really concerned with what we call the scenario. It only affects
the narrative at the scene level in immediate relation to the actor within
the structure of the situation. It would be impossible to think of a closer
dependence of content and form, or, better, a more perfect fusion of the
two. Ellipsis gives definition to the aesthetic crystallization of Chaplin's
work. But in this connection, Monsieur Verdoux is undoubtedly the most
completely crystallized fikn of all. Although one can complain that the
majority of the Charlie films are a succession of more or less perfect but
relatively disordered scenes, the "cleavage planes" within Monsieur Ver-
doux are in some way horaotlietic to the much smaller units of ellipsis.
Their interdependence is much more apparent than real, These dramatic
crystals, when you bring them together, fit into one another. As we know,
Monsieur Verdoux contains some of Chaplin's most perfect ellipses. I
already mentioned the one of the guillotine we do not see. We are familiar
with the furnace and its black smoke in the rose garden, or the killing of
the woman indicated just by Verdoux's going into and coming out of the
bridal chamber. But these ellipses scaled to actor and scene have their
counterparts in the enormous gaps separating the sequences. To go from
one to the other by way of an explanatory title indicating the year and the
place where the next action unfolds is just a pseudo-awkwardness as
normal in a plot of this kind as a little placard indicating the setting in the
Shakespearean theater. As for the train shot which introduces various
sequences and provides the film with an interior rhythm like a leitmotif,
it reaches a level almost of abstraction, so tightly does it condense time
and events into a single image.
Wliat could mislead us about the formal qualities of Monsieur Verdoux
and make us consider it less well made than, for example, The Gold Rush
(whereas it is certainly more perfectly made) is a natural confusion in the
spectator between the comic density of the film and the myth. Whenever
one thinks of Charlie, he is inseparable from the comic routines with which
he won over the public. Since The Gold Rush, there has been a sharp
decline in the wealth of Chaplin's comic imagination. There is more inven-
tiveness, there are more gags in three hundred feet of The Pilgrim than in
all of his last fonr films. There is certainly no room here for congratula-
122
The Myth of Monsieur Verdoux
tion. On the other hand, neither should we harbor any resentment against
Chaplin, nor interpret the fact as necessarily indicating an aesthetic im-
poverishment. Rather, everything takes place in Monsieur Verdoux as if
this undeniable draining of his comic genius was the price to be paid for,
or perhaps the cause of, an increased refinement of the myth. The middle
part of Monsieur Verdoux is lightened by a monstrous gag, the sturdy
comic bulk of which testifies, to our delight, that it belongs to the geological
strata of the good old Charlie films; but the business with the glass of rum,
and especially the final image of the film, have a quality, a finesse, a purity,
which is only found diree or four times in all of Chaplin's work. I don't
think one has to ask oneself if this collapse or erosion of Chaplin's comic
genius is compensated for by an enriching of the myth. We have here two
aesthetic values, incomparable in their richness. I think it is wiser to pre-
sume the existence here of some mysterious aesthetic necessity and (since
I have plunged into geographical metaphors) to see in Monseur Verdoux
the work nearest to that equilibrium profile in which the myth, like a river
flowing effortlessly and without hindrance to the sea, deposits no more
than a fine carpet of sUt and of gold dust.
123
LIMEUGHZ OR THE DEATH OF MOLIERE
TO WRITE about Limelight is a task which has nothing in common with the
professional critic's monotonous day-to-day, week-to-week job. The fol-
lowing comments, then, are a meditation upon an event called Limelight.
1 am discussing the film before seeing it again in a public cinema, I
write on the basis of the remarkable gathering at Biarritz at which the
whole French cinema world wept at the sight of the death of Moliere —
that is to say, of Calvero, alias Chaplin. When I say wept, 1 am not exag-
gerating. As the lights went up, they revealed four hundred directors,
screenwriters, and critics choked with emotion, their eyes red as tomatoes.
There is only one word to describe the note struck by this film, and we
must first restore it to its full classical meaning — sublime.
This performance was undoubtedly intended simply as a prepreview
of Limelight. But the selectness of the spectators, and above all the pres-
ence of Chaplin, made of it a complex affair of which the film itself was
just one component. The audience was at once the most alert and the most
receptive ever assembled. Its predisposition to be favorable was conjoined
with the greatest lucidity. But at the same time this unusual assembly was
justified as much on the ground of Chaplin's presence as by the fihn itself.
Half of the performance we attended was in the hall.
Granted, there is nothing so very original in such a situafion, but what
happened showed that in the circumstances it took on a very special signifi-
124
Limelight, or the Death of Moliire
cance. Naturally it was a matter of paying a moving tribute to Charles
Chaplin — and much could be said about the enthusiasm aroused by his
visit, and about the undiminished strength of his popularity. But this would
not be enough to explain either the intensity or the quality of our emotional
response to the film. I am going to try to make myself understood by
setting up a ridiculous hypothesis : what would Limelight mean to an
imaginary spectator who had never heard of Chaplin or of Charlie? Proba-
bly the question is meaningless because it contains a contradiction in
terms-and this contradiction immediately gives us the measure of the
film. There are certainly more people on earth who have never heard of
Napoleon or Hitler or Churchill or Stalin, than of Charlie. The Great
Dictator was not possible, indeed had no meaning, except insofar as
Chaplin was sure that the myth of Charlie was more powerful and more
real than that of Hitler, that their physical resemblance worked in his
favor, and that Charlie would thereby drain his double of his blood, leav-
ing only skin and bone. For it is crucial to grasp that the basis of the fibn
was not the exploitation by Chaplin of his likeness to the man of Berchtes-
gaden; on the contrary, it was based on the unwitting imitation of Charlie
by Hitler. To unmask the dictator, Chaplin had only to remind the world
of his copyright in the moustache.
This is something that must be thoroughly understood before one
starts thinking about Limelight. It is impossible to separate the story of
Calvero from the Chaplin myth. I do not mean in the elementary and
primary sense that one can discern in the story some obvious autobio-
graphical elements — "a portrait of the artist by himself," as one English
critic put it; but in a more basic sense, namely of a self-criticism of the
myth by its author. Verdoux was already meant to do this: the kUler of
widows was Charlie disguised as his social opposite number. In Limelight
the machinery is much more complex, to the decisive degree that we are
not concerned with Charlie but with Chaplin himself. Verdoux, in a sense,
represented the dialectical triumph of the character of Charlie and by the
same token the end of him. Limelight treats by implication the relations
between an actor and character he plays. Calvero was once famous but
old age, helped on by alcoholism, lost him his engagements. In a few years
125
What Is Cinema?
the public had virtually forgotten not only Calvero's name but even what
he looked like, so that when he was offered a modest opportunity to return
to the stage, he preferred to use a false name. This was a mistake, because
the public might have paid some slight attention to Calvero, but was totally
uninterested in an unknown, aging clown.
May we not see in this episode, as in Calvero's decision to give up the
music hall in exchange for the anonymity of a street singer, a touching self-
questioning on Chaplin's part? What would he be without the glory of
being Charlie, what would he be, deprived of his myth and left to the re-
sources of his craft with such strength as old age can muster?
Limelight, then, is certainly autobiography, above all in reverse. The
downfall of Calvero, the heartlessness of the public, the renunciation of
love by the old clown, are the shadows thrown behind Chaplin by the
light of his glory, of his success, both professionally and in love, A psycho-
analyst might go a step further and point out that to evoke this imaginary
failure is not unconnected here with the failure of Chaplin's father, a singer
who lost his voice and vainly sought consolation in drink. The London of
the film is the London of Chaplin's wretched childhood, but the street
urchins in Limelight arc his own children, and in real life Calvero's rival
in love is Sydney Chaplin.
But enough! A psychoanalysis of Limelight adds nothing to its value.
All that matters is to reveal how intimately the work depends on its author,
Futhermore, this dependence is not so much psychological as w^hat we
might call ontological. While Limelight is a direct evocation of Chaplin's
childhood, this evocation is subordinated to the theme of the actor's rela-
tion with the character he plays. The true subject of the film remains: Can
Charlie die? Can Charlie grow old? Instead of handling this two-fold and
touching inquiry like a question to be answered, Chaplin exorcises it
through a story of the lost fame and old age of a man who resembles
him like a brother.
That night at Biarritz found us in a marvellously effective combination
of circumstances. The audience was composed of the four hundred people
in all of France to whom the myth of Charlie meant most — and Chaplin
126
Limelight, or the Death of Moliere
was there! Thus an extraordinary drama was enacted, with three charac-
ters: the audience, the fihn, and Chaplin. When I alluded above to the
death of Moliere, it was no exaggeration, Moliere died on the stage like
Calvero, playing in a farce in which he tried to exorcise sickness and death
by making fun of doctors.
Thus we were in Chaplin's presence at the spectacle of his death. And
we wept with all the more emotion because we knew he was present and
alive. Our tears were multiplied by the gratitude we felt, by the joy that we
anticipated when the lights went up of seeing once more his silvery hair, his
smile touched with emotion, his blue eyes. Indeed he was there. The film
was just a sublime bad dream, but a dream as true as reality, one that
allowed us to measure our love for him in his most beautiful role : the death
of a clown called Charlie. Who in the world since theater began, what
playwright or actor, has ever reached that supreme and paradoxical posi-
tion in his art of being in himself the object of his tragedy? Doubtless many
authors have put themselves more or less into their works, but without the
knowledge of the public and hence without the elements of drama. Lime-
light is not Le Misanthrope, nor is it a play a clef, and Chaplin is not
Sacha Guitry. We are concerned with something other than his fame — his
myth. Only the age of cinema, doubtless, allows the actor and his charac-
ter to merge to this extent; Oedipus and Sophocles; Goethe and Faust;
Cervantes and Don Quixote.
Moliere died unobtrusively, surrounded by a few friends, and was
buried by torchlight. Blessed be the cinema which frees our Moliere from
the necessity of dying in order to make of his death the most beautiful of
all his films.
127
1
THE GRANDEUR OF LIMELIGHT
SOME PEOPLE may well have felt intimidated, in reacting to Limelight, by
the critical terrorism that surrounded the first appearance of the film in
Paris. There was no such favorable predisposition toward Monsieur Ver-
doux and no one was shocked by a divided press — nor by a divided public
which had not exactly lined up for it. But then Chaplin had not come to
play the traveling salesman for Monsieur Verdoux. His presence on this
occasion created a strangely ambiguous situation. The wave of sympathy
and curiosity stirred up by the person of the author broke over the film.
To have any reservations about it was to set a limit to one's admiration for
its maker. This confusion reached its height on the occasion of the historic
showing at which Qiaplin presented Limelight to the French film press
and film makers — a paradoxical apotheosis at which the author offered his
audience the dramatic spectacle of his own downfall and death. Through
the power of the cinema the death of Moliere became the fourth act of
Le Malade imaginaire. When the lights went up, the entire audience, in
tears, turned toward that same face that had just faded from the screen
and sat stunned, as if at the end of a marvelous and terrible dream, to find
him still alive. We could no longer distinguish between the admiration we
felt for Chaplin and onr sense of relief at being released, thanks to his
presence, from a delicious fear.
And truly it seemed at first that these were parasitic emotions, not
belonging to the work itself. Probably more than one among all those who
expressed themselves in superlatives over Limelight would have been bored
128
The Grandeur of Umelighi
if they had not been influenced by public opiolon. Some critics, or for that
matter a lot of spectators, who were a little more sensitive than the rest,
had mixed feelings about the film. They had enjoyed this or that aspect
of it, but not the whole thing. They were annoyed at the moral pressure,
at the blackmail asking for total admiration, that was seemingly being prac-
ticed on them. Basically, they were right. Nonetheless, I would like to
defend the remarkable atmosphere of snobbism which surrounded the pre-
miere of Limelight.
Undoubtedly Chaplin came to Europe to insure the proper launching
of his film. Monsieur Verdoux, boycotted in the United States and coolly
received in Europe, had been a commercial failure. Although Limelight
had been made in a much shorter time — actually just a few weeks — it is
reasonable to think that its success was of vital concern to its author-
producer. He was right in thinking that the best possible publicity would
be for him lo be present. What happened seems to have borne him out.
Limelight had an exceptional run but it was not a resounding success.
The distributor had trouble fulfilling the minimum attendence of half a
million admissions required by his contract — an enormous figure but one
that those handling the exhibition felt would be easily reached. If it had not
been for the extraordinary publicity the press gave Chaplin's visit and the
sympathetic buildup this created for the film, the odds are strong that it
would have been a resounding flop, even allowing for its importance.
There would have been nothing astonishing about this. It was easy at
the outset to see how much in Limelight would disturb people who had
gone in the anticipation of seeing '*a Charlie Chaplin film" — ^which re-
tained, even more than Monsieur Verdoux, some element of comedy.
Nor was the melodramatic aspect of the story calculated to please people,
because it was based on illusion. Limelight is a pseudo melodrama, Where
melodrama is primarily defined by the absence of ambiguity in the char-
acters, here Calvero is ambiguity itself; and whereas, from a dramatic
point of view, melodrama requires that one should be able to forsee the
outcome of the plot, Limelight is precisely a film in which what happens
is never exactly what one might expect — its scenario is brim full of inven-
tiveness as any ever written.
129
What Is Cinema?
But ihe general public likes nothing better than to believe in a melo-
drama that IS franJJy one — parodies prove this. Only a minimum of camou-
flage is required so that the little housemaid in the balcony can feel that
it is a proof of her biteUigence when she cries. The public reacts all the
more unfavorably to intelligent filjms that disguise themselves as melo-
drama— as in Le del est d vous by Jean Gremillon. No film could pre-
dispose its audience more unfavorably than Limelight, which has all the
surface appearance of a great tearjerking melodrama but which con-
stantly plays havoc with the viewers emotions. Tliere is not the slightest
trace here of irony or parody which could serve as an intellectual guide-
post, a recognizable manner. Chaplin is not trying to deviate from the con-
ventions of melodrama as Cocteau did in Les Parents terribles — on the
contrary, no one has taken himself more seriously. It is simply that situa-
tions which start out as conventional are exploited with complete freedom,
and without any concern for their traditional meaning. In short, there is
nothing in Limelight which on the face of it could guarantee it wide public
acceptance unless through a misunderstanding. Under these conditions,
there nothing reprehensible in the concern of its author to make psycho-
logical preparations for its launching; besides, for once the fihn journalists
might justifiably act as accomplices in this.
I will go even further. In my opinion a critical argument of much
greater importance can be added to this external justification, itself moral
rather than aesthetic. Undoubtedly everyone has the right to have reser-
vations about masterpieces — to criticize Racine for Theramene's speech,
Moliere for his denouements, Comeille for his awkard handling of the
rules. Nor do I suggest there is anything false or barren about such criti-
cism. But given a level of artistic creativity, and certainly when faced with
evidence of genius, a contrary attitude is necessarily more rewarding. In-
stead of thinking of removing so-called faults from a work it is wiser,
rather, to be favorably predisposed to them, and to treat them as quali-
ties, whose secret we have not so far been able to fathom. This is, I agree,
an absurd critical attitude if one has doubts about the object of one's criti-
cism; it requires'a gamble. One has to "believe'' in Limelight to become its
complete advocate in this way — but there is no lack of reasons for believ-
130
The Grandeur of Limelight
mg in it. The fact that they are not equally evident to everybody simply
proves, as Nicole Vedres says in Le Cahiers du Cinema, that if everyone
loved it, it had arrived too late.
However, perhaps I am exaggerating. This defensive criticism will
undoubtedly not be valid for every masterpiece, even if one grants that
the author is a genius. But it surely does apply to that type of work to
which Limelight belongs and which I would classify as "meditated" rather
than "made" or "thought out." I am speaking of those works which are
their own body of reference and whose interior structure might be com-
pared to the stratification of crystals about a central point. Their stiucture
cannot be completely grasped except in relation to this focal point. If one
is prepared to see them from the inside, their apparent disorder, their very
incoherences, are transformed into a perfect and necessary order. Where
it is a question of this kind of artistic creation, it is never the artist who
errs but the critic who is slow to grasp the need for a "flaw."
I was confirmed in this view precisely on the evening at the Comedie
Fran^aise when the gods brought together Don Juan and Chaplin. How
often has one read or heard that Moliere's tra^comedy is without doubt
his richest work but also his least "well-made"? He wrote it quickly, and
its seeming disorder — -its chopped-up quality, the breaks in its tone —
would all be a natural consequence. To be sure, we are always ready to
find a certain charm in these defects, even to forgive them, but never to
doubt they are defects. However, it was to the great credit of Jean Meyer's
production that it was played at some speed and without an intermission,
so that we saw for the first time the perfection of its dramatic structure. It
is Uke some movements in nature that the eye is unable to connect but that
the speedcd-up camera can reveal to be of a wondrous harmony. Be-
side Don Juan, Les Fourberies de Scapin seems slow and disorganized.
If I may dare to compare them, the resemblances between Moliere's
masterpiece and Limelight go very deep. Like Don Juan, Liimlight is a
work at once deeply pondered and quickly written, revealing beyond
doubt Chaplin's most secret heart, borne inside him over a long period,
perhaps even unaware, but brought forth in an interval of time that allowed
for few changes or second thoughts— while ordinarily Chaplin spent
131
Wfmt Is Cinema?
months or even a year on his films. The speed with which it was made, or
rather the rapid development of this last and visible stage, instead of pro-
ducing blemishes and weakness gives the work the impeccable harmony
proper to something arising directly from the unconscious. I am not arguing
here in favor of romantic inspiration, rather on the contrary for a psy-
chology of creation calling at one and the same time for genius, reflection,
and a fine spontaneity in execution. It is precisely these conditions that I
find fulfilled in Limelight.
That is why I find that a predisposition to admiration for the film is the
most prudent critical approach, more rewarding and more certain than
one that ifs and buts. Almost everybody praises the second half, but many
deplore the longueurs and the talkiness of the first half. However, if one
were truly responsive to the last 24 minutes of the film, in retrospect one
could not imagine a different opening. It becomes apparent that even the
boredom one might experience enters mysteriously into the harmony of
the over-all work. In any case, what do we mean here by the word bore-
dom? I have seen Limelight three times and I admit I was bored three
times, not always in the same places. Also, I never wished for any short-
ening of this period of boredom. It was rather a relaxing of attention that
left my mind half free to wander — a daydreaming about the images. There
were also many occasions on which the feeling of length left me during the
screening. The fihn, objectively speaking a long one (two hours and twenty
minutes), and slow, caused a lot of people, myself included, to lose their
sense of time. I see that this phenomenon and the special nature of my
periodical boredom have a common cause, namely that the structure of
Limelight is really more musical than dramatic. I find tliis confirmed by
the English pressbook of the film, three quarters of which is devoted to
the music of Limelight, to the importance that Chaplin attached to it,
and to strange details such as that before he rehearsed a scene, Chaplin
would have the score played so as to steep himself in its musical content.
In which c^ time in Limelight would be essentially not that of the drama
but the more imaginary duration of music, a time that is more demanding
on the mind but also leaves it free of the images that nourish it, a time
that can be embroidered.
132
The Grandeur of Limelight
Certainly the principal obstacle to a satisfactory criticism of Limelight
is the work's fuodamental ambiguity. Undoubtedly there is not a single
essential ingredient of the scenario of this dubious melodrama, which on
analysis is not revealed to be fundamentally ambiguous. Let us look for
example at the character of Calvero. Since we tend to think of him in
the likeness of Charlie, we do not doubt that we are here dealing with a
brilliant cbwn whose reputation in his great days was not overrated. But
nothing could be less certain. Chaplin's real theme is not the decline of
the clown through old age and the fickleness of the public, but something
more subtle — the value of the artist and the evaluation of his public. Noth-
ing in the fikn allows us to attribute to Calvero more than a talent for a
solid traditional craft. None of his numbers is original — not even the
one of the shrinking legs: Grock did it, doubtless following many others.
Besides he repeats it twice, leaving us to conclude that his repertoire is
not very varied. Are his routines even funny? We are told in the Mm
that they were funny, but not that they are so objectively, independent of
public approval. And that is the real point. The value of Calvero, Ms talent
and his genius, are not an objective reality affected by varying fortunes,
but a fact relative to success itself. As a clown Calvero exists only "for the
others." He knows himself only as reflected in the public mirror. Chaplin
is not asserting that, inversely, there have never been great artists who
were misunderstood and that success or failure are the only true realities
of the theater; he is asserting only that the artist is incomplete without his
public, that the public does not grant or withhold its approval like an ob-
ject added to something or subtracted from it, but that this approval con-
situtes the theatrical personality. We shall never know whether Calvero
had genius, and he is less likely to know than we are. What does his glorifi-
cation by friends who remember him prove? Does not a collective emo-
tion come in here — like the one the audience felt over Limelight because
Chaplin came to the opening? What is the value of a favorable prejudice
such as this? If the audience felt sympathetic, might this not have been
as a result of the drinks that were served? Such self-interrogation, lying
deep in the heart of the clown as an actor, is at once repudiated and asked
for by Calvero. As one grows old, he says, one aspires to be dignified. The
133
W/iat Is Cinema?
aclor is less than a man, because he needs other people before he can
fulfill himself, because at every appearance he throws himself on their
mercy. The wisdom of an aging Calvero is to attain to a serenity beyond
success and failure but without denying his art. He knows and affirms that
life, just life itself, is the supreme good, but he who is called to be an artist
may never renounce his vocation. "I do not love the theater," says Cal-
vero, "neither can I stand the sight of the blood that circulates in my
veins."
The theme of theater and of life grasped in all its ambiguity is com-
bined with the Faustian theme of old age. Drink has ruined Calvero but
it is old age that prevents him from setting foot, however tentatively, upon
the boards again. Just as Limelight is not exactly the story of the down-
fall of a clown, the relation between Calvero and Theresa cannot be re-
duced to a renunciation of youth by old age. To begin with It is not certain
that Theresa does not genuinely love Calvero. It is rather he that per-
suades her that her feeling for him is unlikely. Of the two it is he who has
the freer heart, he who suffers less from their separation; old age is in no
sense a weakness, it embodies more strength, more faith in life than does
Theresa's youth. Calvero is the anti-Faust, a man who knows how to grow
old and renounce Marguerite, who had been captivated by his advanced
age. And yet Limelight is the most moving of the tragedies of old age, and
there can be no questioning this, remembering those wonderful shots in
which all the weariness of the world finds its way into this tired mask; the
dressing-room scene of the taking off of the make-up, or of the old clown
pacing restlessly in the wings during the ballet.
If we compare Calvero now with Chaplin himself as the lilm compels
us to do, the ambiguities of the work are raised to further heights. For,
after all, Calvero is at once Chaplin and his opposite. First, and irrefutably,
by the identity of the faces. It is not by chance that Chaplin here for the
first time is clean-shaven and tells us the story of an aging clown. But, sec-
ondly, the truth about Chaplin is the opposite of Calvero's failure: in
his art as in his life, Chaplin is a Calvero whose fabulous fame has never
blown eclipse and who at sixty married a girl of eighteen like Theresa,
by whom he has five lovely children. All the same, the Socratic wisdom
of Calvero in the midst of his misfortunes may not differ so greatly from
134
r
The Grandeur of Limelight
that of Mr. Chaplin, showered with success and love. It is difficult not
to see Calvero as the shadow thrown by Chaplin — what the most presti-
gious author of all times might have been if success had abandoned him
(as it abandoned Keaton for example) and if Oona, less sure of herself,
had believed, like Theresa, that her love was only a profound pity. But
at the same time one must admit that in his hour of happiness Chaplin
has known how to fashion the wisdom that would have allowed him to
put up with Calvero's lot — otherwise, where would Calvero have found
it? Still, one must surmise that the possibility makes Chaplin shudder and
haunts his nights — else why would he have made Limelight'}
For Limelight cm be likened to an exorcising of its author's fate.
Calvero is at once Chaplin's fear and his victory over that fear. A double
victory, first because the phantom of failure is therein objectivized, incar-
nated by the person it could haunt, and furthermore because the fallen
anist of the filin has something better than the strength to recapture his
serenity; he is able to justify himself In the success of a young being who
will carry his venture forward. When the camera pulls away from Calvero
lying dead in the wings and goes to the ballerina onstage, dancing despite
her grief, its movement seems to follow transmigration of souls: the theater
and life go on.
Here we come to the basic originality of Limelight: its " confessional"
side, or the ''portrait of the author" which shocks some people. Still, such
things have long been accepted in literature. I am not talking only about lit-
erary "journals" whose explicit purpose this is. but about many novels
which are more or less transpositions of the author's life story. Besides, the
most impersonal works are not always the least immodest. LoDuca recalls
in Cahiers du Cinema, apropos of Limelight, the phrase borrowed by Vit-
torini for the preface to Conversazione in Sicilia: "Every work is an auto-
biography even if die subject is Genghis Kahn. or the New Orleans ceme-
tery." Flaubert says, "Madame Bovary is me.'' The expression is only
astonishing or shocking when it is a question of the cinema, and this can be
explained in two ways:
First, its relative novelty, even though the works of von Stroheim for
example, or in France of Jean Vigo, are also an endless moral confession.
True, the relation is not so explicit, but the more personal nature of Chap-
135
lin's confidences constitute a progression, a proof of the maturity of his
art. ChaiUe was a moral silhouette, a marvelous aggregrate of symbols; his
existence, totally metaphysical, was that of the myth. Monsieur Verdoux
presupposes already a dialectic relation between the myth and its author
— an awareness of Charlie outside the character. Beyond that it only re-
mained for Chaplin to throw away his mask and speak to us face to face,
his countenance laid bare. Everyone agrees that when one sees Limelight
it is impossible to separate what we know of "Charlie," from what we know
of Chaplin — but this knowledge does not differ essentially from the ten-
dency of all contemporary criticism of great works, which serves to feed
our admiration by way of an ever-deepening knowledge of the lives of
their authors. This knowledge of the author's life is not an end in itself,
but it allows us to discover new relations which clarify and enrich our
understanding of the works. In Chaplin's case the process is simply re-
versed. TT,e prodigious popularity of its author and of his earlier works
put the contemporary spectator in a privileged position that the next
generation will not be able to enjoy. Already many young people be-
tween fifteen and twenty lack our points of reference and are unable to
look back and see Calvero in the light of the Chaplin myth. Is this to say
that LimeUght is valueless except as it relates to Charlie and to Chaplin
and that its significance will disappear with time? Certainly not — ^no more
than that works of an autobiographical character demand a deep know-
ledge of literary history. You do not need a textbook to read Villon's
Ballade des Fendus or Rousseau's Confessions. Many novels and plays
a clef fade into oblivion because they roused interest solely by reason of
indiscretion or curiosity, and this is what distinguishes them from works of
real importance in which the author has dealt with his own misery in the
perspective of our human condition. If a hundred years from now we
came across LimeUght and no record remained either of Chaplin or his
works, that face of his, the deep melancholy of those eyes, would still be
enough to tell us that from beyond the grave a man is talking to us about
himself, and that he is calling us to witness his life because it too is life,
our life. The screen has never before given so clear an example of trans-
posed autobiography, principally because genuine authors are rare in the
136
The Grandeur of Limelight
cinema; the vast majority of directors, even the best of them, are far from
possessing the creative freedom enjoyed by the writer. Even when he
writes his own screenplay, the film maker remains primarily a director,
that is to say a master craftsman who orgamzes objective elements. Such
working conditions are sufficient to warrant artistic creation and the de-
velopment of style but they lack that total identification, that biological
cohesion often found in other arts — ^between Van Gogh and his painting,
between Kafka and his novels. Qaude Mauriac has rightly pointed out
that Chaplin makes the cinema serve him while others make themselves
its servant. In other words, he is the artist in the fullest sense of the term,
one who meets art on an equal footing. If he expresses himself by way
of cinema, it is not so much because his talents and gifts are more readily
adapted to it than for example to literature, but because the cinema can
express what he has to say more effectively. The great artists of the late
sixteenth century were primarily painters and architects because painting
and architecture were the arts of their time. But this was only the best
way of being an artist, not of serving a particular art. However, it was
thanks to this absence of humility — ^not toward art but toward the par-
ticular forms in which it is categorized today — ^that the art par excellence
of the Renaissance, painting, made such great progress. Leonardo was no
more a painter than Michelangelo was a sculptor; they were just artists.
That Chaplin, who composes music, has his moments of philosophizing,
and even draws a little, is a mediocre musician, a second-rate philosopher,
and a Sunday painter, is unimportant. What is crucial is not Chaplin's
objective freedom to choose the cinema but the subjective freedom ,of his
relations with the twentieth-century art par excellence, the film. Chaplin is
perhaps the only example to date of a creative person who has totally sub-
ordinated the cinema to what he had to say, without worrying about con-
forming to the specifics of its techniques.
Yet this is what some reproach him for — those who have confidence
in literature because it passes through the confessional tax of language,
but who find public confession lacking in modesty. A theatrical art, an
hyperbole of incarnation because of the overwhelming physical presence
of the image, the cinema is actually the most immodest of the arts. There-
137
What Is Cinema?
fore, by the same token, it calls for the maximum of modesty: for mask and
disguise, in style, in subject matter, in make-up. Chaplin in Limelight
half removes the first two, the third he renounces entirely. Ecce homo.
Doubtless nothing short of his genius could have succeeded in such an
audacious undertaking, drawing its meaning from the very popularity of
the Chaplin myth, and therefore comprehending in its premises the maxi-
mum risk of pride and immodesty. In France we have a caricature of
this in Sacha Guitry. He had to be sure of public affection to go on about
himself, to tens of millions of people, with such seriousness and such con-
viction: sure of himself too to remove the mask that had made him so loved.
But the most admirable thing of all is not that — it is that Limelight should
be, because of its personal references, so searing, so pure; it is that the
trancendence of its message, far from being weighted down by its incar-
nation, should on the contrary derive from this its most spiritual strength.
The greatness of Limelight is one with the greatness of the cinema itself —
it is the most dazzling display of its very essence, abstraction by way of
incarnation. Undoubtedly only the unique position of Chaplin, the univer-
sality and vitality of his myth (we must not forget that he is still shared
today by the Communists and the Western world) allow us to take the
dialectic measure of the cinema. Chaplin-Calvero, the twentieth-century
Socrates, drinks the hemlock in public. But his wisely chosen death can-
not be conveyed in words. It is first and foremost in the public exhibition
he makes of it, daringly based on the flesh and blood ambiguity of the
cinematographic image: see and understand!
It is ridiculous to talk of immodesty here; on the contrary, we should
marvel that thanks to the cinema and to Chaplin's genius, the most pro-
found and simple truth may take on a countenance — no longer even that
of the actor (and what an actor!) but of a man whom each of us loves and
knows, a countenance that speaks to him personally, face to face, in the
secret places of the heart, in the darkness.
Chaplin is the only film director whose work stretches over forty
years of the history of cinema. The genre in which he first appeared and
was triumphant, the silent comedy, was already in its decline before the
138
The Grandeur of Limelight
arrival of sound. Sound finished ofi Harry Langdon and Buster Keatoo,
who could not truly survive the genie in which they had shown genius.
Von Stroheim's life as a director lasted no more than five years. The
average duration of film genius is somewhere between five and fifteen
years. Those who hold on longer owe it to intelligence and talent rather
than to genius. Only Chaplin has been capable, I will not say of adapting
himself to the evolution of the film, but of continuing to be the cinema.
Since Modern Times, the last of his films to come directly out of the
primitive genre of Mack Sennett and the last of his virtually silent films,
Chaplin has never stopped moving forward into the unknown, redis-
covering the cinema in relation to himself. Alongside Limelight, all other
films, even those we most admire, seem cut and dried and conventional
Although they may express their author's views, although they may have
a personal style, they are only original in part; they conform to some film
usages, they are defined by current conventions, even when they con-
travene them. Limelight is like no other film, above all like no other
Chaplin film.
It would be an understatement to say that this man of sixty-four is
still in the vanguard of the cinema. At one stroke, he has forged ahead
of everyone else; more than ever, he remains an example and a symbol of
creative freedom in the least free of the arts.
139
THE WESTERN: OR THE
AMERICAN FILM PAR EXCELLENCE
THE WESTERN IS the Only genre whose origins are almost identical with
those of the cinema itself and which is as alive as ever after almost half a
century of uninterrupted success. Even if one disputes the quality of its
inspiration and of its style since the thirties, one is amazed at the steady
commercial success which is the measure of its health. Doubtless the
western has not entirely escaped the evolution of cinema taste — or indeed
taste, period. It has been and will again be subjected to influences from
the outside — for instance the crime novel, the detective story, or the so-
cial problems of the day — and its simplicity and strict form have suffered
as a resuh. We may be entitled to regret this, but not to see in it a state
of decay. These influences are only felt in a few productions of relatively
high standing and do not affect the low-budget films aimed principally at
the home market. Furthermore, it is as important for us to marvel at the
western's capacity to resist them as to deplore these passing moments of
contamination. Every influence acts on them like a vaccine. The microbe,
on contact, loses its deadly virulence. In the course of fifteen years, the
American comedy has exhausted its resources. If it survives in an occa-
sional success, it is only to the extent that, in some way, it abandons the
rules that before the war made for successful comedy. From Underworld
(1927) to Scarf ace (1932) the gangster film had already completed the
140
The Western
cycle of its growth. The scenarios of detective stories have developed
rapidly, and if it is still possible to rediscover an aesthetic of violence with-
in the framework of the criminal adventure which they share with Scar-
face, we would be hard put to see in the private eye, the journalist, or the
G-man the reflection of the original hero. Furthermore, if there is such
a genre as the American detective film one cannot attribute to it the in-
dependent identity of the western; the literature which preceded it has con-
tinued to influence it, and the latest interesting variants of the crime film
derive directly from it.
On the contrary, the durability of the western heroes and plots has been
demonstrated recently by the fabulous success on television of the old
Hopalong Cassidy films. The western does not age.
Its world-wide appeal is even more astonishing than its historical
survival. What can there possibly be to interest Arabs, Hindus, Latins,
Germans, or Anglo-Saxons, among whom the western has had an unin-
terrupted success, about evocations of tlie birth of the United States of
America, the struggle between Buffalo Bill and the Indians, the laying
down of the railroad, or the Civil War!
The western must possess some greater secret than simply the secret
of youthfulness. It must be a secret that somehow identifies it with the
essence of cinema.
It is easy to say that because the cinema is movement the western is
cinema par excellence. It is true that galloping horses and fights are its
usual ingredients. But in that case the western would simply be one va-
riety of adventure story. Again, the continuous movement of the charac-
ters, carried almost to a pitch of frenzy, is inseparable from its geograph-
ical setting and one might just as well define the western by its set- — the
frontier town and its landscapes; but other genres and schools of film-
making have made use of the dramatic poetry of the landscape, for ex-
ample the silent Swedish film, but although it contributed to their greatness
it did not insure their survival. Better stiil, sometimes, as in The Over-
landers, a western theme is borrowed — in this case the traditional cattle
drive — and set in a landscape, central Australia, reasonably like the
141
What Is Cinema?
American West. The result, as we know, was excellent. But fortunately
no attempt was made to follow up this paradoxical achievement, whose
success was due to an unusual combination of circumstances. If in fact
westerns have been shot in France against the landscapes of the Camargue,
one can only see in this an additional proof of the popularity and healthi-
ness of a genre that can survive counterfeiting, pastiche, or even parody.
It would be hopeless to try to reduce the essence of the western to one
or other of these manifest components. The same ingredients are to be
found elsewhere but not the same benefits that appear to go with them.
Therefore, the western must be something else again than its form. Gallop-
ing horses, fights, strong and brave men in a wildly austere landscape could
not add up to a definition of the genre nor encompass its charms.
Those formal attributes by which one normally recognizes the western
are simply signs or symbols of its profound reality, namely the myth.
The western was born of an encounter between a mythology and a means
of expression: the saga of the West existed before the cinema in literary
or folklore form, and the multiplication of western films has not killed ofE
western literature which still retains its public, and continues to provide
screenwriters with their best material. But there is no common measure
between the limited and national audience for western stories and the
worldwide audience for the films which they inspire. Just as the miniatures
of the Books of Hours served as models for the statuary and the stained-
glass windows of the cathedrals, this western literature, freed from the
bonds of language, finds a distribution on the screen in keeping with its
size — almost as if the dimensions of the image had become one with those
of the imagination.
This book [J.-L, Rieupeyrout's La Grande adventure du western
1894-1964, for which Bazln was here writing the Preface] will empha-
size a little-known aspect of the western: its faithfulness to history. This is
not generally recognized — primarily, doubtless, because of our ignorance,
but still more because of the deeply rooted prejudice according to which
the western can only tell extremely puerile stories, fruits of a naive power
of invention that does not concern itself with psychological, historical, or
even material verisimilitude. True, few westerns are explicitly concerned
with historical accuracy. True, too, these are not the only ones of any value.
142
The Western
It would be absurd to judge the characters of Tom Mix — still more of his
magic white horse — or even of William Hart or Douglas Fairbanks, all
of whom made lovely ilms m the great primitive period of the western,
by the yardstick of archeology.
After all, many current westerns of honorable standing — I am think-
ing of Beyond the Great Divide, Yellow Sky, or High Noon — have only
a tenuous relation to historical fact. They are primarily works of imagi-
nation. But one would be as much m error not to recognize the historical
references in die western as to deny the unabashed freedom of its screen-
plays J.-L. Rieupeyrout gives a complete account of the birth of its epic-
like idealization, based on comparatively recent history, yet it could be
thai his study, concerned to recall to us what is ordinarily forgotten, or
even not known, and confining itself to films that justify his thesis, dis-
cards by implication the other side of the aesthetic realty. Still, tliis would
show him to be doubly right. For the relations between the facts of history
and the western are not immediate and direct, but dialectic. Tom Mix
is die opposite of Abraham Lincoln, but after his own fashion he per-
petuates Lincohi's cult and his memory. In its most romantic or most naive
form, the western is the opposite of a historical reconstracdon. There is no
difference between Hopalong Cassidy and Tarzan except for their cos-
tume and the arena in which they demonstrate their prowess. However, if
one wanted to take the trouble to compare these delightful but unlikely
stories and to superimpose on them, as is done in modem physiognomy, a
number of negatives of faces, an ideal western would come through, com-
posed of all the constants common to one and to the other: a western made
up solely of unalloyed myth. Let us take one example, that of the woman.
In the first third of the film, the good cowboy meets the pure young
woman- — the good and strong virgin, let us call her — with whom he falls in
love. Despite its chasteness we are able to guess this love is shared. How-
ever, virtually insurmountable obstacles stand in its way. One of the most
significant and most frequent comes from the family of the beloved — ^f or
example, her brother is a sinister scoundrel and the good cowboy is forced
to rid society of him, man to man. A modem Chimene, our heroine re-
fuses to see in her brother's assassin any sort of a fine fellow. In order to
redeem himself in his charmer's eyes and merit forgiveness, our knight
143
What Is Cinema?
must now pass through a series of fabulous trials. He ends by saving his
elected bride from a danger that could be fatal to her person, her virtue,
her fortune, or aU three at once. FoUowing which, since we are now near
the end of the film, the damsel would indeed be ungrateful if she did not
feel that her suitor had repaid Ms debt, and allow him to start dreaming
of lots of children.
Up to this point, this outline into which one can weave a thousand
variants— for example, by substituting the Civil War for the Indian threat,
cattle rustlers — comes close to reminding us of the medieval courtly ro-
mances by virtue of the preeminence given to the woman and the trials
that the finest of heroes must undergo in order to qualify for her love.
But the story is often complicated by a paradoxical character — the
saloon B-girl — who as a rule, is also in love with the cowboy. So there
would be one woman too many if the god of the screenwriter was not keep-
ing watch. A few minutes before the end, the prostitute with the heart of
gold rescues the man she loves from some danger or another, sacrificing
her life and her hopeless love for the happiness of her cowboy. This also
serves to redeem her in the eyes of the spectators.
There is food for thought here. Note, first of all, that the distinction
between good and bad applies only to the men. Women, all up and down
the social scale, are in every case worthy of love or at least of esteem or
pity. The least little prostitute is redeemed by love and death — although
she is spared the latter in Stagecoach with its resemblance to de Maupas-
sant's Boule de Suij, It is true that the good cowboy is more or less a re-
formed offender so that henceforth the most moral of marriages with his
heroine becomes possible.
Furthermore, in the world of the western, it is the women who are
good and the men who are bad, so bad that the best of them must redeem
themselves from the original sin of their sex by undergoing various trials.
In the Garden of Eden, Eve led Adam into temptation. Paradoxically
Anglo-Saxon puritanism, under the pressure of historical circumstances,
reverses the Biblical situation. The downfall of the woman only comes
about as a result of the concupiscence of men.
Qeariy, this theory derives from the acmal sociological conditions
144
The Western
obtaining in primitive wesiem society which, because of the scarcity of
women and the periis of a too harsh existence in this burgeoning world,
make it imperative to safeguard its female members and its horses. Hang-
ing was considered enough punishment for steaUog a horse. To engender
respect for women more was needed than the fear of a risk as trifling as
the loss of one's life, namely the positive power of a myth. The myth of
the western illustrates, and both initiates and confirms woman in her role
as vestal of the social virtues, of which this chaotic world is so greatly in
need. Within her is concealed the physical future, and, by way of the
institution of the family to which she aspires as the root is drawn to the
earthj its moral foundation.
These myths, of which we have just examined what is perhaps the most
significant example (the next is the myth of the horse) may themselves
doubtless be reduced to an even more essential principle. Basically each
of these particularize, by way of an already specific dramatic plot, the groat
epic Manicheism which sets the forces of evil over against the knights of
the true cause. These immense stretches of prairie, of deserts, of rocks
to which the little wooden town clings precariously (a primitive amoeba
of a civilization), are exposed to all manner of possible things. The Indian,
who lived in this world, was incapable of imposing on it man's order. He
mastered it only by identifying himself with its pagan savagery. The white
Christian on the contrary is truly the conqueror of a new world. The grass
sprouts where his horse has passed. He imposes simultaneously his moral
and his technical order, the one linked to the other and the former guaran-
teeing the latter. The physical safety of the stagecoaches, the protection
given by the federal troops, the building of the great railroads are less
important perhaps than the estabhshment of justice and respect for the
law. The relations between morality and law, which in our ancient civiliza-
tion are just a subject for an undergraduate paper, were half a century ago
the most vital thing confronting the youthful United States. Only strong,
rough, and courageous men could tame these virgin lands. Everyone knows
that familiarity with death does not keep alive the fear of hell, nor do
scruples or moral debate. Policemen and judges are of most help to the
weak. It was the force of this conquering humanity that constituted its
145
What Is Cinema?
weakness. Where individual morality is precarious it is only law that can
impose the order of the good and the good of order.
But the law is unjust to the extent that it pretends to guarantee a moral
society but ignores the individual merits of those who constitute that so-
ciety. If it is to be effective, this justice must be dispensed by men who
are just as strong and just as daring as the criminals. These virtues, as we
have said, are in no way compatible with virtue in the absolute sense. The
sheriff is not always a better person than the man he hangs. This begets and
establishes an inevitable and necessary contradiction. There is often little
moral difference between the outlaw and the man who operates within
the law. Still, the sheriff's star must be seen as constituting a sacrament
of justice, whose worth does not dej^nd on the worthiness of the
man who administers it. To this first contradiction a second must be added,
the administration of justice which, if it is to be effective, must be drastic
and speedy — short of lynching, however — and thus must ignore exten-
uating circumstances, such as alibis that would take too long to verify. In
protecting society, such a form of justice runs the risk of unkindness to
the most turbulent though not perhaps the least useful nor even the least
deserving of its children.
Although the need for law was never more clearly allied to the need
for morality, at the same time never was their antagonism more concrete
and more evident. It is this which provides a basis, within a slapstick
framework, for Charlie's Pilgrim^ at the conclusion of which we see our
hero riding his horse along the borderline between good and evil, which
also happens to be the Mexican border.
lohn Ford's Stagecoach, which is a fine dramatic illusration of the
parable of the pharisee and the publican, demonstrates that a prostitute
can be more respectable than the narrow-minded people who drove her
out of town and just as respectable as an officer's wife; that a dissolute
gambler knows how to die with all the dignity of an aristocrat; that an
alcoholic doctor can practice his profession with competence and devo-
tion; that an outlaw who is being sought for the payment of past and pos-
sibly future debts can show loyalty, generosity, courage, and refinement,
146
The Western
whereas a banker of considerable standing and reputation runs off with
the cashbox.
So we find at the source of the western the ethics of the epic and
even of tragedy. The western is in the epic category because of the
superhuman level of its heroes and the legendary magnitude of their feats
of valor. Billy the Kid is as invulnerable as Achilles and his revolver is
infallible. The cowboy is a knight-at-arms. The style of the mise en scene
is in keeping with the character of the hero. A transfomation into an
epic is evident in the set-ups of the shots, with their predilection for vast
horizons, all-encompassing shots that constantly bring to mind the con-
flict between man and nature. The western has virtually no use for the
closeup, even for the medium shot, preferring by contrast the travelmg
shot and the pan which refuse to be limited by the frameline and which
restore to space its fullness.
True enough. But this epic style derives its real meaning only from
the morality which underlies and justifies it. It is the morality of a world
in which social good and evil, in their simplicity and necessity, exist like
two primary and basic elements. But good in its natal state engenders law
in all its primitive rigor; epic becomes tragedy, on the appearance of the
first conflict between the transcendence of siocial justice and the individual
character of moral justice, between the categorical imperative of the law
which guarantees the order of the future city, and the no less unshake-
able order of the individual conscience.
The Comeille-like simplicity of western scripts has often been a subject
for parody. It is easy to see the analogy between them and the text of Le
Cid: there is the same conflict between love and duty, the same knighfly
ordeals on the completion of which the wise virgin will consent to forget
the insult to her family; the same chaste sentiments which are based on a
concept of love subordinated to respect for the laws of society and mo-
rality. But this comparison is double-edged: to make fun of the western
by comparing it to Comeille is also to draw attention to its greatness, a
greatness near perhaps to the child-like, just as childhood is near to poetry.
Let there be no doubt about it. This naive greatness is recognized in
147
What Is Cinema?
westerns by simple men in every clime — together with the children—
despite differences of language, landscape, customs, and dress. The epic
and tragic hero is a universal character. The Civil War is part of nineleentt
century history, the western has turned it into the Trojan War of the mosl
modem of epics. The migration to the West is our Odyssey.
Not only is the historicity of the western not at odds with the no less
evident penchant of the genre for outlandish situations, exaggerations of
fact and the use of the deus ex macliina (m short, everything that makes
for improbability); il is, on the contrary, the foundation of its aesthetic and
its psychology. The history of film has only known one other epic cinema
and that too is a historical cinema. Our purpose here is not to compare
epic form in the Russian and in the American film, and yet an analysis
of their styles would shed an unexpected light on the historical meaning
of the events reconstructed in the two of them. Our only purpose is to
point out that it is not their closeness to the facts that has given them their,
styles. There are legends that come into being almost instantaneously, that
half a generation suffices to ripen into an epic. Like the conquest of the
West, the Soviet revolution is a collection of historical events which signal;
the birth of a new order and a new civilization. Both have begotten the
myths necessary for the confirmation of history, both had to reim^ent a
moraiity to rediscover at their living source and before mixture or pol-
lution took place, the foundation of the law which would make order out
of chaos, separate heaven from earth. But perhaps the cinema was the:
only language capable of expressing this, above all of giving it its true
aesthetic dimension. Without the cinema the conquest of the West would
have left behind, in the shape of the western story, only a minor literature,
and it is neither by its painting nor its novels that Soviet art has given the
world a picture of its grandeur. The fact is that henceforth the cinema is ,
the specifically epic art.
148
THE EVOLUTION OF THE WESTERN
BY THE EVE of the war the western had reached a definitive stage of per-
fection. The year 1940 marks a point beyond which some new develop-
ment seemed inevitable, a development that the four years of war de-
layed, then modified, though without controlling it. Stagecoach (1939)
is the ideal example of the maturity of a style brought to classic perfec-
tion. John Ford struck the ideal balance between social myth, historical
reconstruction, psychological truth, and the traditional theme of the
western mise en scene. None of these elements dominated any other.
Stagecoach is like a wheel, so perfectly made that it remains in equilib-
rium on its axis in any position. Let us list some names and titles for
1939-1940: King Vidor: Northwest Passage (1940), Michael Curtiz:
The Santa Fe (1940), Virginia City (1940); Fritz Lang; The Helum
oj Frank James (1940), Western Union, (1940); John Ford: Drums
Along the Mohawk (1939); William Wylei: The Westerner (1940)-
George Marshall, Destry Rides Again, with Marlene Dietrich, (1939).*
This list is significant. It shows that the established directors, having
perhaps begun their careers twenty years before with serial westerns made
almost anonymously, turn (or return) to the western at the peak of their
careers — even Wyler whose gift seemed to be for anything but this genre.
* A disappointing remake of this ilm was shot in 1955 by the same George
Marshall, with Audie Murphy.
149
What Is Cinema?
This phenomenon can be explained by the widespread publicity given
westerns between 1937 and 1940. Perhaps the sense of national aware-
ness which preceded the war in the Roosevelt era contributed to this. We
are disposed to think so, insofar as the western is rooted in the history of
the American nation which it exalts directly or indirectly.
In any case, this period supports J.-L. Rieupeyrout's argument for
the historical realism of the western.*
But by a paradox more apparent than real, tlie war years, properly
so-called, almost removed the western from Hollywood's repertoire. On
reflection this is not surprising. For the same reason that the westerns were
multiplied and admired at the expense of other adventure films, the war
film was to exclude them, at least provisionally, from the market.
As soon as the war seemed virtually won and even before peace was
definitely established, the western reappeared and was again made in large
numbers, but this new phase of its history deserves a closer look.
The perfection, or the classic stage, which the genre had reached im-
plied that it had to Justify its survival by introducing new elements. I do not
pretend to explain everything by the famous law of successive aesthetic
periods but there is no rule against bringing it into play here. Take the new
films of John Ford. My Darling Clementine (1946) and Fort Apache
(1948) could well be examples of baroque embellishment of the classi-
cism of Stagecoach. All the same, although this concept of the baroque
may account for a certain technical formalism, or for the relative pre-
ciousness of this or that scenario, I do not feel that it can justify any fur-
ther complex evolution. This evolution must be explained doubtless in
relation to the level of perfection reached in 1940 but also in terms of the
events of 1941 to 1945.
Let us call the ensemble of forms adopted by the postwar western the
"superwestern." For the purposes of our expose this word will bring to-
gether phenomena that are not always comparable. Tt can certainly be
justified on negative grounds, in contrast to the classicism of the forties
and to the tradition of which it is the outcome. The superwestern is a
* Le Western ou le cinema americain par excellence, Collection Septieme Art.
Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1953,
150
The Evolution of the Western
western that wouJd be ashamed to be just itself, and looks for some addi-
tional interest to justify its existence — an aesthetic, sociological, moral,
psychological, political, or erotic interest, in short some quality extrinsic
to the genre and which is supposed to enrich it. We will come back later
to these adjectives. But first we should indicate the influence of the war
on the evolution of the western after 1944. The phenomenon of the
superwestern would probably have emerged anyway, but its content would
have been different. The real influence of the war made itself deeply felt
when it was over. The major films inspired by it come, naturally, after
1945. But the world conflict not only provided Hollywood with spectacu-
lar scenes, it also provided and, indeed, forced upon it, some subjects to
reflect upon, at least for a few years. History, which was formally only
the material of the western, will often become its subject: this is particularly
true of Fort A pache in which we see the begiiming of political rehabilita-
tion of the Indian, which was followed up by numerous westerns up to
Bronco Apache and exemplified particularly in Broken Arrow by Del-
mer Daves (1950). But the profounder influence of the war is undoubtedly
more indirect and one must look to find it wherever the film substitutes a
a social or moral theme for the traditional one. The origin of this goes
back to 1943 with William Wellman's Oxbow Incident, of which High
Noon is the distant relation. (However, in Zinnemarm's film it is also a
rampant McCarthyism that is under scrutiny.)
Eroticism also may be seen to be at least an indirect consequence of
the war, so far as it derives from the triumph of the pin-up girl. This is
true perhaps of Howard Hughes' The Outlaw (1943). Love is to all in-
tents and purposes foreign to the western, (Shane wUl rightly exploit this
conflict.) And eroticism all the more so, its appearance as a dramatic
springboard implying that henceforth the genre is just being used as a foil
the better to set off the sex appeal of the heroine. There is no doubt about
what is intended in Duel in the Sun (King Vidor, 1946) whose spectacu-
lar luxury provides a further reason, albeit on formal grounds, to classify
it as a superwestern.
Yet High Noon and Shane remain the two films that best illustrate the
mutation in the western genre as an effect of the awareness it has gained
151
What Is Cinema?
of itself and its limits. In the former, Fred Zimemaim combines the effect
of moral drama with the aestheticism of his framing. I am not one of those
who turn up theli no&es at High Noon, 1 coasider it a fine film and prefer
it to Stevens' film. But the great skill exemplified in Foreman's adapta-
tion was his ability to combine a story that might well have been developed
in another genre with a traditional western theme. In other words, he
treated the western as a form in need of a content. As for Shane this is
the ultimate in "superwestemization," In fact, with it, George Stevens set
out to justify the western — by the western. The others do their ingenious
best to extract explicit themes from impEed myths but the theme of Shane
is the myth. In it Stevens combines two or three basic western themes,
the chief being the knight errant in search of his grail, and so that no one
will miss the point, Stevens dresses him in white. White clothes and a white
horse are taken for granted in the Manichean world of the western, but it
is clear that the costume of Alan Ladd carries with it all the weighty sig-
nificance of a symbol, while on Tom Mix it was simply the uniform of
goodness and daring. So we have come full circle. The earth is round. The
superwestern has gone so far beyond itself as to find itself back in the
Rocky Mountains.
If the western was about to disappear, the superwestern would be the
perfect expression of its decadence, of its fimal collapse. But the western Is
definitely made of quite other stuff than the American comedy or the
crime film. Its ups and downs do not affect its existence very much. Its
roots continue to spread under the Hollywood humus and one is amazed to
see green and robust suckers spring up in the midst of the seductive but
sterile hybrids that some would replace them by.
To begin with, the appearance of the superwestern has only affected
the more out-of-the-ordinary productions: those of the A-fiim and of the
superproduction. These surface tremors have not disturbed the commer-
cial nucleus, the central block of the ultracommercial westerns, horse-
back or musical, which may even have found a second youth on television.
(The success of Hopalong Cassidy is a witness to this and proves likewise
the vitality of the myth even in its most elementary form.) Their accept-
ance by the new generation guarantees them several more cycles of years
152
The Evolution of ifw Western
to come. But low-budget westerns never came to France and we have
to be satisfied with an assurance of their survival from the personnel of
American distribution companies. If their aesthetic interest, individually, is
limited, their existence on the other hand is probably decisive for the gen-
eral health of the genre. It is in these "lower" layers whose economic
fertility has not diminished that the traditional western has continued to
take root. Superwestem or no superwestem, we are never without the
B-westera that does not attempt to find refuge in intellectual or aesthetic
alibis. Indeed, maybe the notion of the B-film is open to dispute stace
everything depends on how far up the scale you put the letter A. The
productions I am talking about are frankly commercial, probably fairly
costly, relying for their acceptance only on the reputation of their lead-
ing man and a solid story without any intellectual ambitions. The Gun-
fighter, directed by Henry King (1950) and starring Gregory Peck, is a
splendid example of this attractive type of production, in which the classic
theme of the killer, sick of being on the run and yet forced to kill again, is
handled within a dramatic framework with great restraint. We might men-
tion too Across the Wide Missouri, directed by William Wcllman (1951),
starring Clarke Gable, and particularly Westward the Women (1951)
by the same director.
In Rio Grande (1951), John Ford himself has clearly returned to
the semiserial format, or at any rate to the conmiercial tradition — ^ro-
mance and all. So it is no surprise to find on this list an elderly survivor
from the pioneer days of old, Allan Dwan, who for his part has never
forsaken the old Triangle* style, even when the liquidation of McCarthy-
ism gave him the chance to broaden the scope of the old-time themes
(Silver Lode, 1954).
I have still a few more points to make. The classification I have fol-
lowed up to now will turn out to be inadequate and I must no longer ex-
plain the evolution of the western genre by the western genre itself. Instead
I must take the authors into greater account as a determining factor. It
will doubtless have been observed that the list of relatively traditional pro-
* An amalgamation of three American film-production companies, Keystone,
KayBee, and Fine Arts.
153
What Is Cinema?
ductions that have been little influenced by the superwestern includes only
names of established directors who even before the war specialized in fast-
moving adventure films. It should come as no surprise that their work
affirms the durability of the western and its laws, Howard Hawks, indeed,
at the height of the vogue of the superwestern should be credited with
having demonstrated that it had always been possible to turn out a genuine
western based on the old dramatic and spectacle themes, without dis-
tracting our attention with some social thesis, or, what would amount to
the same thing, by the form given the production. Red River (1948) and
The Big Sky (1952) are western masterpieces but there is nothing ba-
roque or decadent about them. The understanding and awareness of the
means matches perfectly the sincerity of the story.
The same goes for Raoul Walsh, all due allowances being made, whose
film Saskatchewan (1954) is a classical example of a borrowing from
American history. But his other films provide me — and I am sorry if it is a
little contrived — with the transition I was looking for: Colorado Territory
(1949), Pursued (1947) and Along the Great Divide (1951) are, in a
sense, perfect examples of westerns just above the B-level, made in a
pleasantly traditional dramatic vein. Certainly there is no trace of a thesis.
We are interested in the characters because of what happens to them and
nothing happens that is not in perfect accord with the western theme. But
there is something about them that, if we had no information about their
date, would make us place them at once among more recent productions,
and it is this "something'* that I would like to define,
I have hesitated a great deal over what adjective best applies to these
westerns of the fifties. At first I thought I ought to turn to words like "feel-
ing," "sensibility," "lyricism," In any case I think that these words must
not be dismissed and that they describe pretty well the character of the
modem western as compared with the superwestern, which is almost al-
ways intellectual at least to the degree that it requires the spectator to re-
flect before he can admire. All the titles I am about to list belong to films
that are, if not less intelligent than High Noon at least without arriere-
pensee, and in which talent is always a servant of history and not of the
meaning behind history. There is another word, maybe more suitable than
154
The Evolution of the Western
those I have suggested or which provides a useful complement — the word
"sincerity." I mean by this that the directors play fair with the genre even
when they are conscious of "making a western." At the stage to which we
have come in the history of the cinema naivete is hardly conceivable, but
although the superwestem replaces naivete by preciousness or cynicism,
we have proof that it is still possible to be sincere. Nicholas Ray, shooting
Johnny Guitar (1954) to the undying fame of Joan Crawford, obviously
knows what he is about. He is no less aware of the rhetoric of the genre than
the George Stevens of Shane, and furthermore the script and the director
are not without their humor; but not once does Ray adopt a con-
descending or paternalist attitude toward his film. He may have fun with
it but he is not making fun of it. He does not feel restricted in what he
has to say by the limits of the western even if what he has to say is de-
cidedly more personal and more subtle tlian its unchanging mythology.
It is with an eye on the style of the narrative, rather than on the sub-
jective attitude of the director to the genre, that I will finally choose my
epithet. I say freely of the westerns I have yet to name — the best in my
view — that they are "novelistic." By this I mean that without departing
from the traditional themes they enrich them from within by the originality
of their characters, their psychological flavor, an engaging individuality,
which is what we expect from the hero of a novel. Clearly when one talks
about the psychological richness of Stagecoach, one is talking about the
way it is used and not about any particular character. For the latter we
remain within the established casting categories of the western: the banker,
the narrow-minded woman, the prostitute with a heart of gold, the ele-
gant gambler, and so on. In Run jor Cover (1955) it is something else
again. The situation and characters are still just variations on the tradition,
but what attracts our interest is thir uniqueness rather than their generos-
ity. We know also that Nicholas Ray always treats his pet subject, namely
the violence and mystery of adolescence. The best example of this "noveli-
zation" of the western from within is provided by Edward Dmytryk in
Broken Lofice (1954), which we know is only a western remake of Man-
kewicz's House of Strangers. For the uninformed. Broken Lance is simply
a western that is subtler than the others with more individualized charac-
155
What Is Cinema?
ters and more complex relationships but which stays no less rigidly within
the limits of two or three classic themes. In point of fact, Elia Kazan has
treated a psychologically somewhat similar subject with great simplicity in
his Sea of Grass (1947), also with Spencer Tracy. We can imagine many
intermediate grades between the most dutiful B-westem and the novelis-
tic western, and my classification is inevitably arbitrary.
Nevertheless I offer the following idea. Just as Walsh is the most re-
markable of the traditional veterans, Anthony Mann could be considered
the most classical of the young novelistic directors. We owe the most
beautifully true western of recent years to him. Indeed, the author of The
Naked Spur is probably the one postwar American director who seems to
have specialized in a field into which others have made only sporadic in-
cursions. In any case, each of Mann's films reveals a touching frankness
of attitude toward the western, an effortless sincerity to get inside its
themes and there bring to life appealing characters and to invent captivat-
ing situations. Anyone who wants to know what a real western is, and
the qualities it presupposes in a director, has to have seen Devil's Door-
way (1950) with Robert Taylor, Bend of the River (1952) and The Far
Country (1954) with James Stewart. Even if he does not know these
three films, he simply has to know the finest of aU, The Naked Spur
(1953). Let us hope that CinemaScope will not rob Andiony Mann of
his natural gift for direct and discreet use of the lyrical and above all his
infallible sureness of touch in bringing together man and nature, that feel-
ing of the open air, which in his films seems to be the very soul of the
western and as a result of which he has recaptured — but at the level of the
hero of the novel and no longer of the hero of the myth — ^the great lost
secret of the Triangle days.
The above examples show that a new style and a new generation have
come into existence simultaneously. It would be both going too far and
naive to pretend that the novelistic western is just something created by
young men who came to film-making after the war. You could rightly re-
fute this by pointing out that this quality is evident in The Westerner, for
example, and there is something of it in Red River and The Big Sky.
People assure me, although I am personally not aware of it, that there is
156
The Evolution of the Western
much of II in Fritz Lang's Rancho Notorious (1952). At all events it is
certain that King Vidor's excellent Man Without a Star (1954) is to be
placed in the same perspective, somewhere between Nicholas Ray and
Anthony Maim. But we can certainly find three or four films made by
the veterans to place alongside those that the younger men have made. In
spite of everything, it is chiefly the newcomers who delight in the western
that is both classic and novelistic: Robert Aldrich is the most recent and
brilliant example of this with his Apache (1954) and expecially his Vera
Cruz (1954).
There remains now the problem of CinemaScope. This process was
used for Broken Lance, Garden oj Evil (1954) by Henry Hathaway (a
good script at once classic and novelistic but treated without great inven-
tiveness), and The Kentuckian (1955) with Burt Lancaster which bored
the Venice Festival to tears. I only know one film in CinemaScope that
added anything of importance to the mise en scene, namely Otto Premin-
ger's River oj No Return (1954), photographed by Joseph LaShelle. Yet
how often have we not read or have even ourselves written that while
enlarging of the screen is not called for elsewhere, the new format will re-
new the westerns whose wide-open spaces and hard riding call out for
wide horizons. This deduction is too pat and likely sounding to be true.
The most convincing examples of the use of CinemaScope have been in
psychological films such as East of Eden. I would not go so far as to say
that paradoxically the wide screen is unsuitable for westerns or that it
adds nothing to them, but it seems to me akeady an accepted fact that
CinemaScope will add nothing decisive to this field.*
The western, whether in its standard proportions, in Vistavision, or
on a super-wide screen, will remain the western we hope our grandchildren
will still be allowed to know.
* We have a reassuring example of this in The Man from Laramie (1955), in
which Anthony Mann docs not use CinemaScope as a new format but as an ex-
tension of the space around man.
157
ENTOMOLOGY OF THE PIN-UP GIRL
FIRST, LET US iiot confuse the pin-up girl with the pornographic or erotic
imagery that dates from the dark backward and abysm of time. The pin-
up girl is a specific erotic phenomenon, both as to form and function.
Definition and Morphology
A wartime product created for the benefit of the American soldiers
swarming to a long exile at the four corners of the world, the pin-up girl
soon became an industrial product, subject to well-fixed norms and as
stable in quality as peanut butter or chewing gum. Rapidly perfected, like
the jeep, among those things specifically stipulated for modem American
military sociology, she is a perfectly harmonized product of given racial,
geographic, social, and religious influences.
Physically, this American Venus is a tall, vigorous girl whose long,
streamlined body splendidly represents a tall race. Different from the
Greek ideal, with its shorter legs and torso, she thus differs distinctly from
European Venuses. With her narrow hips, the pin-up girl does not evoke
motherhood. Instead, let us note particularly the firm opulence of her
bosom. American eroticism — and hence cinematic eroticism — seems to
have moved in recent years from the leg to the breast.
The parading of Marlene Dietrich and of her legs, with their almost
158
Entomology of the Pin-Up Girl
mathematically perfect contours, the success of Rita Hayworth, the success
(this time de scandale) in Howard Hughes' film The Outlaw of Jane Rus-
sell, whose twin hemispheres were inflated by an airborne publicity cam-
paign to the size of clouds, are an indication of this sweeping displacement
in the geography of sex appeal — or rather, since the term is already out of
date, in "man appeal" The vanguard of feminine attracdveness stands
today at the level of the heart. 1 offer as proof reports which reach us
from Hollywood, and the suit that Paulette Goddard has brought against
a journalist who dared to suggest that she wore falsies.
An adequate physique, a young and vigorous body, provokingly firm
breasts still do not define the pin-up girl for us. She must also conceal that
bosom, which we are not supposed to get a peep at. The clever kind of
censorship which clothing can exercise is perhaps more essential than the
most unmistakable anatomic afRrmadon.
The typical garment of the pin-up girl is the two-piece bathing suit —
which coincides with the limitations authorized socially by fashion and
modesty in recent years. At the same time, however, an infinite variety
of suggestive degrees of undress — never exceeding some rigorously de-
fined limits — show off to advantage the charms of the pin-up girl while
pretending to hide them. For my part, I am inclined to consider these
niceties somewhat decadent: a contamination of the pure pin-up with tra-
ditional erotic imagery. At any rate, it is only too obvious that the veils in
which the pin-up girl is draped serve a dual purpose; they comply with the
social censorship of a Protestant country which otherwise would not have
allowed the pin-up girl to develop on an industrial and quasi-official scale;
but at the same time make it possible to experiment with the censoring
itself and use it as an additional form of sexual stimulus. The precise bal-
ance bfjtween the requirements of censorship and the maximum benefits
one can derive from them without lapsing into an indecency too provoc-
ative for public opinion defines the existence of the pin-up girl, and clearly
distinguishes her from the salaciously erotic or pornographic postcard.
The science of these forms of provocative undress has been developed
to a nicety: today Rita Hayworth need only take off her gloves to draw
admiring whistles from a hall full of Americans.
159
What Is Cinema?
Metamorphosis of the Pin-up Girl
The multiplication and absurdity of today's supporting decors in con-
trast to the childlike and unsophisticated simplicity of the first pin-ups, can
be explained by the need felt by the artist or photographer to vary his
presentation. There are several thousand ways to show a pretty girl in a
bathing suit, but certainly not hundreds of thousands. But as we see it, this
development is a disintegration of the ideal of the pin-up girl.
A wartime product, a weapon of war, with the coming of peace the
pin-up has lost her essential raison d'etre. In the process of its revival this
wartime myth is being separated into its two components, eroticism and
morality. On the one hand, the pin-up girl tends to revert to the category
of sex imagery and all its hypocritical vestiary complications; on the other
to post-mobilization domestic virtues. Furthermore, in the United
States there are even contests for "pin-up mothers" and "pin-up babies."
And finally, the advertisers of tonic waters, chewing gum, and cigarettes
are trying to convert the various salvageable surpluses for peacetime pur-
poses.
Philosophy of the Pin-up Girl
In a general history of eroticism, and more specifically in a history of
eroticism as it relates to the cinema, the pin-up girl embodies the sexual
ideal of the future. In Brave New World Aldous Huxley tells us that when
children are produced in test-tubes, relations between men and women,
sterile henceforth, will have no other purpose than unrestricted pleasure.
Huxley neatly sums up the ideal of beauty and female sexual attractiveness
in an epithet that is at once tactile, muscular, and visual, the adjective
"pneumatic." Is not the pneumatic girl of Huxley the archetype, projected
160
Entomology of the Pin-Up Girl
iflto the future, of the Varga girl? In a long-drawn-out, distant war of in-
vasion, the feminine ideal necessarily represents imagination, sterility, play.
The pin-up girl is the expression of this ideal, extended to the pure status
and scope of a myth, in a society where Protestantism still maintains a
vigilant censorship.
The Pin-up and the Cinema
If I have had little to say of cinema up to this point, it is because the
pin-up girl is not originally part of it. The pin-up was not bom on the
screen but on magazine covers, on the fold-outs of Esquire, on the cut-out
pages of Yank. Subsequently the cinema adopted this erotic mythology as
its own, and soon the American star resembled the drawings of Varga.
The screen already had a solid tradition in this field. The women in
clinging bathing suits who people the trick-shot skies of Georges Melies
derived, too, from a naively erotic imagery whose glory, at the turn of the
century, was the princess of Caraman-Chimay. A little later, in America,
Mack Sennett, that astute precursor in the field foresaw clearly the pop-
ularity of the bathing suit, but the performances of his bathing beauties as
a group, rather like those of the music hall, gave no hint as yet of the
higly individual future of the pin-up gjrl and the star. Thus the cinema from
its beginning was predisposed to the use of the pin-up, and reciprocally to
reinforce the feminine ideal she represents in the imagination and taste of
the public.
I do not value this kind of cinematic eroticism very highly. Produced
by special historical circumstances, the feminine ideal reflected in the pin-
up girl is in the last analysis (despite its apparent anatomical vigor) ex-
tremely artificial, ambiguous, and shallow. Sprung from the accidental
sociological situation of the war, it is nothing more than chewing gum for
the imagination. Manufactured on the assembly line, standardized by
Varga, sterilized by censorship, the pin-up gjrl certainly represents a qual-
itative regression in cinematic eroticism. Lillian Gish in Broken Blossoms,
161
What Is Cinema?
Dietrich in The Blue Angel, Garbo, now Ingrid Bergman — are after all
quite different from Rita Hayworth!
In 1931 the stars were living on grapefruit and hiding their bosoms.
At the same time, the tidal wave of the Hays office censorship was break-
ing over Hollwood, The danger, though seeming to come from the opposite
direction, was at bottom the same: phoniness. Cinematic eroticism wasted
away in artifice and hypocrisy. Then come Mae West. The Mae West of
the future will doubtless not have the generous curves of a Fifi Peachskin.
But neither will she have to react against the same artificialities and shams;
shocking or chaste, shy or provocative, all the American cinema needs
from her is more authenticity.
162
THE OUTLAW
''The best of women is not worth a good horse,"
EVEN BEFORE it was showiQ in France, The Outlaw had acquired a scan-
dalous reputation that was bound to result in public disappointment and
make it a subject of severe criticism. In the event, the film had a short run.
The same people who had fought to get to see it during the first days of
its run booed those sections from which they thought the most interesting
scenes had been cut. They felt robbed. Reviewers for the most part adopted
m indulgent and amused tone. It would have been undipified to show dis-
appointment. One critic managed to see something else in it besides the
absence of Jane Russell's breasts. After aJl, he knew beforehand what he
was dealing with: it would have been naive to expect mote from the Amer-
icans. But even the more aggressive critics did not make out a particularly
convinctag case for seeing in the film yet another example of Hollywood's
decline and standardization. To argue against the hypocrisy of American
moralizing was too easy. And too easy also to extol the good old French
bosoms of Rabelais* nuns, or Moliere's servant girls, or even the amorous
stories of the eighteenth century, as opposed to this canned eroticism, as
deceptive and flavorless as those California fruits which are insipid even to
the worms. Surely, no one saw here the sinister hand of the Marshall Plan
intending to replace the real bosoms of Jacqueline Pierreux or Dany Robm
163
by the deceptive pneumaticism of a Jane Russell. Undeniably, The Outlaw
foundered in a sea of general indifference.
I am inclined to see in this limited attention paid to the Howard Hughes
film first an injustice and second a tacit conspiracy of silence. The careless
way in which the film was dismissed in no more than a line or two, the
unmistakable absence of any passionate feeUng, seemed to me more as-
sumed than genuine. I am afraid the assets of Jane Russell have been
treated like the sour grapes in the fable. If not, then how do we explain
that one of the most erotic films ever made and one of the most sensational
scripts ever filmed by Hollywood has been so little noticed?
The Outlaw is a western. It preserves the framework and the majority
of the traditional themes of a western and some of the characteristic types
of the genre — particularly the lovable and devious sherifl whom we were
so delighted to meet in Wyler's The Westerner. In a film that has retained
such a purity of form as the western any originality is measured by the
slight changes that have been made to the traditional ingredients, the skill
with which the screenwriter and director have succeeded in simultaneously
remaining faithful to the basic rules of the genre and still renewing our de-
light. Jules Furthman, Howard Hughes, and Gregg Toland have concen-
trated their efforts on the style and on an unexpected switch in the female
element, which in the Far West has generally been represented by two
types of heroine, reflecting two complementary aspects of the same myth.
The prostitute with the heart of gold in Stagecoach is on a par in the spec-
tator's judgment with the courageous virgin, rescued by the good cowboy
from extreme danger, whom he will marry once he has proved himself
and triumphed over evil Frequently he takes the place in the girl's life
of her father or her brother killed in a fight. Thus we see clearly drawn in
the western not only the obvious quest for the Holy Grail but in a more
precise sociological and aesthetic degree the mythology of chivalry founded
on the essential goodness of woman, even the sinful woman. It is man
who is bad. Isn't he indeed the cause of her downfall, in spite of which the
prostitute manages to preserve something of her original purity? It is the
hero's role to redeem the evil in man by undergoing trials, in order to win
back the respect and the protection that woman demands of him.
164
The Outlaw
It is this mythology that Howard Hughes attacks, with a violence that I
have found nowhere in the American cinema except in Monseur Verdoux.
The Outlaw is based on contempt for woman. In contrast to their
conterparts elsewhere, its heroes strive to deny the heroine their protection.
They scoff at her endlessly, abandon her, and refuse to undergo any trials.
In this unbelievable anti-quest of the Holy Grail it is the woman who needs
them and who undergoes the severest tests before her master will bestow
a kind glance on her. From beginning to end Jack Beutel and Walter
Huston share Jane Russell, and these two sympathetic and courageous
men, capable of killing one another over a horse, absolutely refuse to fight
over her.
It is clear that Howard Hughes has knowingly given a general signifi-
cance to his heroine. Jane Russell is not a woman who particularly de-
serves such treatment. The absence of any other female character who
might save the good name of her sex, reminding us that "rfiey are not all
like that" through some comparison unfavorable to the heroine, is also
significant. After all, Jane Russell is not at all antipathetic. A woman of
courage, she has sworn to revenge her brother, and it is only after having
conscientiously tried to kill her lover, first with a revolver and then with
a pitchfork, that she is raped by him. Chimene, after all, did no better. One
cannot reproach her for renouncing her vengeance after making love. She
will henceforth love with as much fervor and fidelity as she has once sought
vengeance. The man will even owe her his life on the night when, ill and
shivering and at his last gasp from a deathly chill, Jane Russell presses her
naked body against his.*
To tell the truth, this woman is no worse than any other. There is
nothing about her to give a moral justification for the men's cynicism and
contempt for her. In the logic of the film Jane Russell does not deserve
any particular treatment; these men simply think women are always treated
better than they deserve.
It is no accident that the real scenario is the story of three jealous
males. Two of them, Billy the Kid (Jack Beutel) and Doc Holliday (Walter
* Reminiscent of The River by Frank Borzage. The crow is replaced here by a
starving rooster that gobbles up eyes,
165
What Is Cinema?
Huston) sleep with the same woman — but they Jove the same horse. On
several occasions they come near to killing one another over the horse,
but in the end they retain their friendship. This provokes the jealousy of
Thomas Mitchell, who thinks he is Huston's only friend. So it is that these
men are incapable of jealousy except over a horse or over each other. They
constitute a Spartan group in which women have no emotional role. Women
are only to sleep with or to do the cooking.
It is understandable in such circumstances that the film was banned
by the American censors for four years. The official complaint was the
daring of some scenes, but the real objection, which was more or less ad-
mitted, was to the basic idea of the script. It is forbidden to despise women.
Even the misogyny apparent in the American crime film some years earlier
is a far cry from the cynicism of The Oui\aw. The blonde murderess of
these films is presented as a kind of female criminal; even the men are bad.
In The Outlaw no one is antipathetic; it is the order of the universe that
confers his preeminence on man and makes a domestic animal out of
woman^ — pleasant but boring, not as interesting as an animal.
Still, The Outlaw should not disappoint a perceptive viewer, even on
the level at which the censors tried to deal with it. I remarked earlier that
those who were disappointed by the film are either insincere or lacking in
perception. Admittedly one does not "see" very much, Objectively, if
one sticks purely to what is offered to view, The Outlaw is quite the most
prudish of American films. But it is precisely upon the spectator's frus-
tration that its eroticism is built. Suppose for a moment that the film had
been made in some European country. The Swedes and Danes would have
given us a front and side view of the heroine naked; the French would have
plunged the neckline of her dress to the navel and treated the spectator
to some sensational kissing scenes, the Germans would have shown us just
the breasts, but all of them; the Italians would have put Jane Russell into a
little black nightgown and there would have been some sizzling love scenes.
Altogether it it is Hollywood alone that is capable of making such a film
without showing us a thing. Yet whether in a Swedish, French, or Italian
version, The Outlaw would have much less effect on the viewer's imagina-
tion. If an erotic film is one that is capable of provoking the audience to
166
The Outlaw
desire the heroine sexually and of keeping that desire alive, the technique
of provocation is here brought to the peak of perfection, to the point where
we see nothing but the shadow of a breast.
I strongly suspect Howard Hughes and Gregg Toland of having played
an outrageous trick on the censor. It is surely not an accident that the di-
rector of The Outlaw was an associate of the director of Sullivan's Travels.
Preston Sturges and Howard Hughes were made to understand one an-
other. These two men knew how to structure their work on what for others
would be a limitation. Preston Sturges understood that the mythology of
the American comedy had arrived simultaneously both at saturation point
and the point of exhaustion. There was no way to make use of it other than
to take its excesses as the subject of a scenario. Furthman and Hughes had
fun here by forcing the censors into pornography. On reflection, the real
director of The Outlaw was not Howard Hughes. It was Mr, Hays. If he
had been as free as a novelist to use his medium, the director would not
have been forced to proceed by way of hints, to suggest rape by noises in
the dark and a woman's body by the edge of a low-necked dress. In such
a case the film would certainly have been improved aesthetically, but we
would have been deprived of a delightful satire on censorship. Tartuffe's
handkerchief is placed on this bosom in so obvious a way that not even
a three-year-old child could resist the temptation to pull it off. From un-
satisfied desire to obsession . . .
And so it is that Mr. Hays caters to the erotic dreams of millions of
citizens— all good fathers, good husbands, good fiances. What leads me to
believe that the makers of the film knew exactly what they were doing, is
the staggering skill witli which they were able to play on the fine edges of
the censorship code and not overstep the authorized limits by a hair's
breadth, while constantly making us conscious of the moral prohibition
that weighed on their undertaking. Otherwise The Outlaw would have
been just a daring film, violent and realistic. It was the censorship code that
turned it into an erotic film. Gregg Toland must have had great fun lighting
the throat of .Tane Russell, scrupulously focusing on that milk-white patch
barely hollowed by a shadow, whose mere presence had the frustrated
spectators dithering with resentment. The critics can perhaps be excused
167
What Is Cinema?
for not having understood The Outlaw. All they saw in the film, for the
best of reasons, was what they did not see.
For those particularly interested in the phenomenology of Hollywood
eroticism, I would like to draw attention to a curious shift of emphasis
between the publicity for the film and the film itself. The posters for The
Outlaw show Jane Russell with lifted skirt and generously low-cut dress.
In reality it is only her bosom that counts in the film. The fact is that in
the past seven or eight years the center of eroticism in the American film
has shifted from the thigh to the bosom, but the public is not yet sufficiently
aware of this change of frontier to allow the publicity departments to dis-
pense with their traditional sources of stimulation.
168
MARGINAL NOTES ON
EROTICISM IN THE CINEMA
NO ONE would dream of writing a book on eroticism in the theater. Not,
strictly speaking, because the subject does not lend itself to reflection, but
because these reflections would all be negative. Certainly this is not true
of the novel, since one whole section of literature is founded, more or less
explicitly, on eroticism. But it is only a sector of it, and the existence in the
Bibliotheque Nationale of a section known as "hell" points up the fact. It
is true that eroticism now tends to play an increasingly important role in
modem literature, and novels are full of it, even the popular Dne«?> But
aside from the fact that one should doubtless attribute this spread o£ erot-
icism largely to the cinema, eroticism remains subject to moral notions of
a more general nature which compel us to treat the spreading of it as a
problem. Malraux, who among contemporary novelists has assuredly most
lucidly expounded an etMc of love based on eroticism, illustrates equally
perfectly the modem, historic, and thus relative nature of such a choice.
In short, eroticism tends to play a role in contemporary literature similar
to that of courtly love in medieval literature. But no matter how powerful
its myth, and no matter what future we may foresee for it, eroticism has
clearly no specific coimection with the literature of the novel in which it
spears. Even painting, in which the representation of the human body
169
What Is Cinema?
miglit well have played a determining role, is only accidentally or second-
arily erotic. Licentious drawings, engravings, prints, or paintings constitute
only a genre, a variant coming under the same heading as bawdy writing.
One could make a study of the nude in the plastic arts but, though one
doubtless could not overlook the transmission thereby of erotic feelings,
these still remain a subordinate and secondary phenomenon.
It is of the cinema alone that we can say that eroticism is there on
purpose and is a basic ingredient. Not the sole ingredient, of course, for
there are many films and good ones that owe it nothing, but a major, a
specific, and even perhaps an essential one.
Lo Duca* is right, then, to see one of the constants of cinema in this
phenomenon: "For half a century the sheet covering the movie screen
has borne like a watermark one basic motto: eroticism." But it is important
to know if the ubiquitousness of eroticism, however general, is only an
accidental result of the free capitalist play of supply and demand. Needing
to attract customers, the procedure would namralJy have turned to the
most effective stimulus: sex. One might advance in support of this argu-
ment the fact that the Soviet cinema is indeed the least erotic in the world.
The example deserves thinking about, certainly, but it does not seem con-
clusive, for one would first have to examine the various cultural, ethnic,
religious, and sociological factors which may have come to play in this
particular case — and above all one would have to ask whether the puritan-
ism of Soviet films is not a much more artificial and temporary phenom-
enon than the competition in eroticism among the capitalists. From this
point of view the film The Forty-First opens up a lot of new horizons.
Lo Duca seems to see the source of cinematic eroticism in the relation-
ship between seeing a movie and dreaming. "The cinema resembles the
dream, with its colorless images like those of a film, and this in part ex-
plains the lesser erotic intensity of color films, which in a sense escape the
rules of the word of dreams."
I will not quarrel with my friend except over details. Where do we get
this rooted prejudice that no one ever dreams in color? It cannot be said that
* Lo Duca, Erotisme au cinema, Jean-Jacques Pauvert, 1956.
170
Eroticism in the Cinema
1 am the only one who enjoys this privilege. Besides, I have asked around
among friends. The fact is, there are dreams in black and white and dreams
in color, exactly as in the cinema, depending on the process. The most I
will grant Lo Duca is that the production of color films has outstripped
that of dreams in Technicolor. But I certainly will not go along with him in
his incomprehensible devaluation of eroticism in color. Well, let us attribute
these differences to litde personal perversions and not spend more time on
them. The essential is still the basically dreamlike quality of cinema, of the
moving image.
If this hypothesis is correct, the psychology of the viewer would tend
to be identical with that of the sleeper dreaming. And we know that in the
last analysis all dreams are erotic.
But we also know that the censorship which presides over dreams is
infinitely more strict than all the Mrs. Grundies of the world. The superego
of each of us is, unbeknownst, a Mr. Hays. Hence the extraordinary reper-
tory of symbols, general and specific, whose job it is to disguise from our
conscious minds the impossible scenarios of our dreams.
Consequently the analogy between dreams and cinema should be ex-
tended even further. It lies no less in what we deeply desire to see on the
screen than in what could never be shown there. It is a mistake to equate
the word "dream" with some anarchic freedom of the imagination. In fact
nothing is more predetermined and censored than dreams. It is true, and
the surrealists do well to remind us, that this is not due to our reason. It
is true also that it is only in a negative sense that censorship can be said to
determine the dream, and that its positive reality, on the contrary, lies in
the irresistible transgression of the superego's prohibitions. I am aware too
of the difference between cinematographic censorship, which is social and
legal, and dream censorship; I only want to point out that the function of
censorship is essential to cinema and dreams alike. It is a dialectical con-
stituent of them.
It is this which seems to me to be lacking in Lo Duca's preliminary
analysis, and stiU more in his enormous collection of illustrations, which
constitute a documentation that falls doubly short. The author does know,
of course, how exciting things can be that the censor formally prohibits,
171
but he sees them only as a last resort; above all, the intelligence directing
the choice of his illustrations exemplifies the contrary thesis. It would have
been better to show us what the censor habitually cuts out of films> rather
than what he lets pass. I am not denying the interest and certainly not the
charm of what the censor leaves in, but I do think, in the case of Marilyn
Monroe, that the obligatory photo was not the one from the calendar in
which she posed nude (especially since this extra-cinematographic docu-
ment antedated her success as a star and so cannot be considered a further
extension of her sex appeal on the screen) but rather the famous scene
from The Seven-Year Itch in which the air from the subway grating blows
up her skirt. This inspired idea could only be bom in the world of a cin-
ema with a long, rich, byzantine tradition of censorship. Inventiveness
such as this presupposes an extraordinary refinement of the imagination,
acquired in the struggle against the rigorous stupidity of a puritan code.
Hollywood, in spite and because of the taboos that dominate it, remains
the world capital of cinematic eroticism.
I am not saying, however, that all true eroticism has to outwit an
official code of censorship before it can blossom on the screen. In fact,
what is gained by such surreptitious transgression can be more than offset
by what is lost. The social and moral taboos of the censors are too arbi-
trary and stupid to be able to channel the imagination suitably. Though
helpful in comedy or film-ballet, for example, they are just a hindrance,
dumb and insurmountable, in realistic films.
Thus the one critical censorship that the cinema cannot dispense with
is imposed by the image itself, and in the last analysis it is in relation to
the image and the image alone that we must attempt to define the psych-
ology and the aesthetics of erotic censorship, I certainly do not intend to
outline it here even in the broadest terms, but rather to propose a series of
ideas which, linked up, may indicate a direction in which one might ex-
plore further.
Before anything else, I must give credit for whatever merit these re-
marks may have to Jean Doraarchi, for they stem from a comment he
made to me which seems extraordinarily pertinent and fruitful.
Domarchi, then, who is no prude, told me that he has always been
172
irritated at the orgy scenes on the screen, or in somewhat more general
terms, by any erotic scene incompatible with the impassiveness of the
actors. In other words, it seemed to him that erotic scenes had to be able
to be played like any others, and that actual sexual emotion by the per-
formers in front of the camera was contradictory to the exigencies of art.
This austere view at first seems surprising, but it is founded on an irrefut-
able argument, and on one not resting on moral grounds. If you can show
me on the screen a man and woman whose dress and position are such
that at least the beginnings of sexual consummation undoubtedly accom-
panied the action, then I would have the right to demand, in a crime fihn,
that you really kill the victim — or at least wound him pretty badly. Nor
is this hypothesis ridiculous, for it is not too long ago that kilhng stopped
being a spectacle. The executions in the Place de Greve were just that,
and for the Romans the mortal combat in the circus were the equivalents
of or^es. I once wrote, apropos of a notorious newsreel sequence showing
officers of Chiang Kai-shek's army executing "Communist spies" in the
streets of Shanghai, that the obscenity of the image was of the same order
as that of a pornographic film. An onfological pornography. Here death
is the negative equivalent of sexual pleasure, which is sometimes called,
not without reason, ''the little death."
The theater would never tolerate anything like this. On the stage every-
thing that relates to the physical side of love derives from the paradox of
the actor. No one is ever aroused sexually at the Palais-Royal — neither on
the stage nor in the audience. Strip tease, it is true, poses another question,
but we can agree that strip tease has nothing to do with the theater, even
if it is a spectacle and observe further that it is essential that the woman
herself does the undressing. She could not be undressed by a partner with-
out provoking the jealousy of the entire male audience. In reality, the strip
tease is based on the polarization and stimulation of desire in the spectators,
each one potentially possessing the woman who pretends to offer herself —
but if anyone were to leap on the stage he would be lynched, because his
desire would then be competing with, and in opposition to, that of all
others (unless it turned into an orgy and "voyeurism," which involve a
different mental mechanism) .
173
What Is Cinema?
In the cinema, on the other hand, even a nude woman can be ap-
proached by a partner, openly desired, and actuaDy caressed; because un-
like the theater, an actual acting space based on consciousness and cooflict,
the cinema unreels in an imaginary space which demands participation and
identification. The actor winning the woman gratifies me by proxy. His
seductiveness, his good looks, his daring do not compete with my desires —
they fulfill them.
But if the cinema heJd to this psychology alone, it would idealize
pornographic films. On the contrary, it is clear that if we wish to remain
on the level of art, we must stay in the realm of imagination. I ought to
be able to look upon what takes place on the screen as a simple story, an
evocation which never touches the level of reality, at least unless I am to
be made an accomplice after the fact of an action or at least of an emotion
which demands secrecy for its realization.
This means that the cinema can say everything, but not show every-
thing. There are no sex situations — moral or immoral, shocking or banal,
normal or pathological-whose expression is a priori prohibited on the
screen, but only on condition that one resorts to the capacity for abstrac-
tion in the language of cinema, so that the image never takes on a docu-
mentary quality.
This is why And God Created Woman seems to me, despite some
good qualities that I recognize, in part a detestable film.
I have put forward my argument, developing logically the remark
made by Domarchi. I have now to admit my embarrassment in face of
the objections that arise. They are numerous. To begin with, I cannot
hide from myself the fact that I have brushed off a good part of the con-
temporary Swedish cinema. It will be noticed, however, that the master-
pieces of eroticism seldom succumb to this criticism. Stroheim himself
seems to me to escape it. Sternberg too.
But what troubles me most about the fine logic of my argument is a
sense of its limitations. Wiy do we stop with the actors and not bring the
onlooker into the argument? If the aesthetic metamorphosis is perfect, he
should be no less impassive than the performers. Rodin's "Kiss," despite
its realism, provokes no libidinous thoughts.
174
Above all, is not the distinction between the literary image and the
cinematic image false? To consider the latter as of a different essence be-
cause it is achieved photographically implies many aesthetic consequences
which I will not discuss. If Domarchi's postulate is correct, it is applicable
with proper adaptation to the novel. Domarchi ought to be embarrassed
every time a novelist describes acts which he could not imagine with a
perfectly cool head. Does the situation of the writer differ all that much
from the director and his actors? Only, in these matters the separadon of
the imagination and the act is fairly dubious, if not arbitrary. To grant the
novel the privilege of evoking everything, and yet to deny the cinema,
which is so similar, the right of showing everything, is a critical contra-
diction which I note without resolving.
175
THE DESTINY OF JEAN GABIN
THE FILM Star is not just an actor, not even an actor particularly beloved
of the public, but a hero of legend or tragedy, embodying a destiny with
which scenarists and directors must comply — albeit unwittingly. Otherwise
the spell between the actor and his public will be broken. The variety of
films m which he appears, and which seem so agreeably surprising in iheir
novelty, should not mislead us. It is the confirmation of a destiny, profound
and essential, which we unconsciously seek in the actor's continually re-
newed exploits. This is evident in Chaplin, for example, and, interestingly
enough, more secretly and subtly illustrated in a star like Jean Gabin.
In nearly all Gabin films — at least from La Bete hummne to Au-dela
des grilles — ^he comes to a violent end that has the appearance, more or
less, of suicide. Is it not strange that the commercial law of the happy end-
ing, which forces so many producers to tack on artificial finales like those
of the Moliere comedies, is not valid for one of the most popular and sym-
pathedc actors — ^whom everyone should wish to see happily married with
lots of children?
But can you see Gabin as a family man? Could anyone imagine that, at
the end of Qugi des Brumes, he had managed to snatch poor Michele
Morgan from the clutches of Michel Simon and Pierre Brasseur, and sailed
with her to a future in America; or that, having come to his senses, he
176
The Destiny of Jean Gabin
preferred when day broke in Le Jour se live to turn himself in and hope
for a probable acquittal?
No, it is impossible. The public that swallows many affronts would
undoubtedly feel that they were being taken for a ride if screenwriters
presented them with a happy ending for Jean Gabin.
Proof by a reductio ad absurdum: let someone try to kill off Luis
Mariano or Tino Rossi in the same fashion!
How can we explain this paradox, all the more glaring because it con-
tradicts an inviolable law of the cinema? The explanation is that Gabin,
in the films referred to, is not just giving an interpretation of one story
among many others. It is always the same story — his own, and one which
must inevitably end unhappily, like the story of Oedipus or Phaedra. Gabin
is the tragic hero of the contemporary cinema. With every new Gabin film
the cinema rewinds the infernal machine of his destiny — just as in he Jour
se live, that night, as on every night, he winds up the alarm clock whose
ironic and cruel ringing will sound at daybreak the hour of his death.
It would be a simple matter to show how, under cover of an iftgenious
diversity, the essential gears of the mechanism remain identically the same.
Here is one example. Before the war, h is said, Gabin insisted before sign-
ing any film contract that the story include one of those explosive scenes
of anger at which he excels. Was this the whim of a star, was it the ham
clinging to his little touch of bravura? Perhaps, but he probably felt,
through his actor's vanity, that to deprive himself of it would betray his
character. Indeed it is almost always in a moment of rage that Gabin
brings misfortune on himseU, baiting the fateful trap that will inevitably
cause his death. Besides, in the tragedies and epics of ancient times anger
was not just a psychological state amenable to treatment by a cold shower
or a sedative; it was a special state, a divine possession, an opening for the
gods into the world of humanity, through which destiny steals. Thus in a
gesture of rage Oedipus on the road to Thebes brought rjiisfortune upon
himself by killing a charioteer (his father) whom he did not recognize. The
modem gods who reign over suburban Thebes with their Olympus of fac-
tories and their steel monsters wait too for Gabin at the crossroads of fate.
What I have said holds good more for the prewar Gabin of La Bete
111
What Is Cinema?
hutnaine and Le Jour se live. Gab'm has changed since then; he is older,
his formerly blond hair is gray, his face has grown fatter. In the cinema,
we used to say, destiny does not take on a countenance, it is the countenance
that reveais its destiny. Gabin could not remain the same forever; but
neither could he escape from a mythology that is so solidly established.
And thus, significantly, Aurenche and Bost in Au-dela des grilles have
taken over where Jeanson and Prevert left off. We remember the last shot
of Pipe le Moko: the dying Gabin clinging to the iron railings around
Algiers harbor, watching the ship that carries all his hopes sail away. Rene
Clement's film begins where Duvivier's ended. Its titles might save said,
''Suppose Gabin had been given a chance — he could have caught the
boat; here he is now, on the other side of the railings." The film is simply
Cabin's return to his fate, the quasi-voluntary renunciation of love and
happiness, the admission that a paroxysm of toothache and the gods, when
all is said and done, are the strongest forces in life.
Admittedly in La Marie du Port the force of destiny is softened. Gabin
becomes merely an actor again. For the first time, he gets married — ^but
win he be any happier? Marcel Came has not been able to escape paying
his dues to the old myth. Gabin is rich, he is a "success" — nevertheless,
throughout the film there is talk of a ship in dry dock, or a trawler that
never sets sail, and is there like a witness to the old dream Gabin never
achieved (the dream of an escape he could never make, a parting that
would set him free). Thus his present dubious happiness, Iiis material
rather than moral success, is nothing more than a confession of failure, the
paltry reward of an act of renunciation. The gods are merciful to those who
no longer seek to be heroes.
It remains for the sociologists and moralists (specifically the Christian
moralists — and why not the theologians?) to reflect on the profound mean-
ing of a mythology in which, through the popularity of an actor like Gabin,
millions of our contemporaries rediscover themselves. Perhaps a world
without God becomes a world of the gods and of the fates they dispense.
178
SOURCES AND TRANSLATOR'S NOTES
AN AESTHETIC OF REALITY: NEOREALISM
(CINEMATIC REALISM AND THE ITALIAN SCHOOL OF THE
LIBERATION)
From Esprit, January, 1948
P. 17, Centre Sperimentale di Cinematografia.
This school was founded in 1935 under Mussolini. The Institut des
Hautes Etudes Cinematographiques was founded in Paris in 1943.
P. 21, Beaumarchais (1732-1799).
Author of The Barber of Seville and Figaro, the latter revealing Beau-
marchais' capacity for witty and satirical criticism of French society
during the last days of the ancien regime. On the eve of World War II
Jean Renoir consciously and successfully paralleled Beaumarchais in
La Regie du jeu,
P. 22, Anna Mapani.
Originally a popular singer in Rome's Trastevere, the equivalent of
Montmartre in Paris or of Cockney London.
P. 26, expressionist heresy.
Heresy because it does not reflect reality as cinema should. It is curious
179
What Is Cinema?
that Eisenstein and Bazin are in agreement in condemning expression-
ism (see Film Form, p. 203) although their ideas of cinematic realism
are not at all the same. (Eisenstein said, "I am not a realist, I am a
materialist.")
P. 26, the art of cinema lives off this contradiction. Bazin is implying
here what he states more explicitly elsewhere, notably in "The Myth
of Total Cinema" (What Is Cinema? Vol. I, p. 17.) Cinema tends with
each new invention towards a greater realism, the complete achieve-
ment of which would mean its own destruction.
P. 28, parallelepiped,
A six-sided prism whose faces are parallelograms. Presumably Bazin
wishes here to give a concrete metaphor for his conception of film
space as a very real entity with boundaries that can be rigidly visualized.
P. 31, the law of gravity that governs the ordering of the facts.
This notion of gravity also appears in the essay on Cobiria, Again
Bazin uses an analogy from science in distinguishing between the
deliberate aesthetic ordering of events and the order that seems to
be set up in the sheer weight of the facts themselves, so that they would
seem to "tumble vertically into place." This idea of Bazin's strikbgly
resembles one expressed by the English poet Gerard ManJey Hopkins:
"Chance left free to act fails into an order as well as purpose."
LA TERRA TREMA
From Esprit, December, 1948
P. 41, the exoticism intrinsic to the subject matter. The word
"exoticism" is used generally to describe a certain kind of literature
and film dealing with places and peoples unfamiliar to the reader
or viewer. Bazin describes this type of film in What Is Cinema? Vol.
180
Notes
I, p, 155, citing Ruttmann's Melodie der Welt. Thus the word has a
wider meaning than the one usually attached to it,
p. 43, Bazin's use of technical tenns.
French technical film terms are sometimes misleading because they
do not always mean what at first sight (or first translation) they appear
to mean. A definition of three terms that appear frequently in Bazin's
essays may help the reader to avoid the pitfall of literal translation:
Decoupage does not mean cutting or editing, though it can bear on
this process; it normally means the definitive form or structure of the
fiJm as described on paper, as it is to appear later on the screen; its
usual English equivalent is "shooting script." Mise en scene is a term
taken from the theater, meaning the actual creating or structuring of
the film by the metteur en scene or director. It can be used in a matter-
of-fact way, and perhaps should be; but in recent years it has also been
given a larger meaning, referring to many elements of a director's
style. Montage is not necessarily used in the sense in which we com-
monly employ it, to refer especially to Russian or "classical" montage.
In French it frequently refers to the "mounting" or assembling of
shots — ^what we usually call editing or cutting.
P. 46, Piscator,
Bazin is referring to the film The Revolt of the Fishermen, directed in
1934 at Mezhrapom by the German theater producer Erwin Piscator,
founder during World War I of the Proletarian Theater, and in exile
in the USSR at the time. Brecht, in his younger days, worked with
Piscator and was considerably influenced by him.
BICYCLE THIEF
From Esprit, November, 1949
P. 49, populist.
Populism is the name given to a literary school that aimed at a realistic
181
What Is Cinema?
portrayal of the lives of "the common people." See also Bazin's
essay on Umberto D.
P. 52, phenomenological integrity.
The event as it appears in itself to the senses and the mind, either
before any discourse or, as here, presenting it without dramatic manip-
ulation that may "cheat on reality." See also Bazin's essay on De Sica.
P. 57, limpidity.
Limpidity is a quality both of objects (such as water) and, by analogy,
of style. Bazin is here saying that what would normally derive from
the style is here derived from the object, or in this case from the
event.
P. 58, Roger Leenhardt.
Born 1902. Director and film critic. He was Bazin's film mentor and
his predecessor on film subjects in the section of Esprit entitled
"Journal a plusieurs voix."
P. 58, madeleine.
A light cake; important as a memory stimulant in Proust's A la
recherche du temps perdu.
P. 59, congenitally a hybrid.
For a discussion of this subject and Bazin's rejection of "pure cinema,**
see What Is Cinema? Vol. I, pp. 53 ff.
P. 60, integral of reality.
As distinct from a reality divided up by montage or distorted by ex-
pressionist techniques.
DE SICA, METTEUR EN SCENE
This text was originally published in Italian in 1951 by Edizione Guanda,
Parma. The English version is based on the French translation.
182
Notes
P, 64, The faithful reproduction of reality is not art.
From this it follows that neither is it cinema, in spite of the reproductive
quality of the camera. This aspect of the question "Is film an art?" was
early treated by Rudolf Arnheim {Film as Art, pp. 8 ff,)
P. 64, Naturalism.
Originally a literary movement. Flaubert is considered the founder, fol-
lowed by the Goncourts, Daudet, Zola, Maupassant, and Huysmans, They
wrote novels and plays a these, applying to the arts the methods and find-
ings of science.
P. 66, NeoreaBsm is an ontological position . . .
because it is concerned with things as they are and events in their phenom-
enological integrity. Its aesthetic has been dealt with in the previous essay.
P. 66, American neorealism.
Although the movement is not called neorealism in the United States,
Bazin is referring presumably to the realism of the writings of W. D.
Howells, Dreiser, Hemingway, Faulkner, Dos Passos, and others. The
term is sometimes used to describe the work of some Italian post-World
War II novelists, notably Pavese and Viitorini. "The term" says Heiney
m America in Modern Italian Literature (p. 78) "comes from the cinema,"
and is not very satisfactory outside the cinema.
P. 66, Zavattini is the only one who shamelessly admits to the title.
In this context (and by way of supporting Bazin's arguments) it is in-
teresting to refer to a statement by Zavattini himself. He is speaking of
the preparations of a film that was never made, Italia Mia. It was to be
an experiment in "a kind of film which had respect for the circumstances
in which we live. It would not merely be the product of the author's imagi-
nation which is always to some extent isolated from reality. I hoped that
the things-in-themselves could become a story because only in that way it
seemed to me could a film-writer really listen to the cry of reality.'"
183
What Is Cinema?
P. 68, dramatic contingency.
As distinct from the "irreversible fataJiiy" of classic tragedy, with its neces-
sity which is the opposite of "contingmt,"
P. 69, loving things in their singular individuality.
Here we have an echo of the epistemology of Duns Scotus, Franciscan.
The implications of this statement may be deduced from various passages
in these essays, most notably those concerning Rossellini and Francis of
Assisi, whose love of things is expressed so clearly in his "Canticle of All
Created Things." It is an attitude characteristic of a poet and is admirably
illustrated in a passage from the Introduction by Robert Bridges to the
poems of Gerard Manly Hopkins (Penguin Poets, pp. xxiii, xxiv). "Un-
like St. Thomas Aquinas, Scotus attached great importance to individ-
uality and personality. Again where Aquinas had said that the individual
is really unknowable (only the universal being known) Scotus declared
that the individual on the contrary is immediately knowablc by the intellect
in union with the senses. By a first act of knowlege, the mind has a correct
but vague intuition of the individual concrete object as a most special
thing. We can imagine how so much emphasis on the value of the concrete
thing, the object of sense, must have appealed to the poet in Hopkbs."
It also helps us to see Scotus as a proto-phenomenologist.
P. 70, the tenderness of De Sica.
In this paragraph the word ambiguity once more appears. As we have
pointed out in the Introduction Bazin and Amedee Ayfre attach great im-
portance to this "ambiguity of reality." Hence, Bazin here holds himself
aloof from both the Christian Democrat and the Communist view and in-
terestingly parallels Christian charity and Marxist class consciousness. One
cannot help wondering if his tongue is not in his cheek when he asks : "What
party indeed could afford to leave love to the other?" In this same section
he refers to love scaling walls and penetrating strongholds. This is one of
184
Notes
his many allusions to medieval French literature. Here he is thinking of Le
Roman de la Rose.
p. 72, Andre Suares,
Bom 1866. A solitary and pessimistically inclined person, haughty and
aristocratic. Interested in all forms, in life and art, that exhibit heroism
and force. Wrote, among other books, stories of Tolstoy, Pascal, Ibsen
and Dostoievsky. "Le Coeur ignoble de Chariot" appeared in Comadia,
Paris, July 3, 1926. In his reply next day in the same paper, J. Baroncelii
said that the attack "revoked and saddened" him.
P. 74, Who steals an egg, steals a buU.
The English equivalent is "He who will steal a pin will steal a pound."
P. 76, A cinema of "duration."
Bazin appears to have in mind here the Bergsonian use of the word
"duration"; Bergson's philosophy was particularly concerned with "time."
This is not the only place where Bazin has recourse to Bergsonian terms
and concepts (see note on Cabiria). Bergson contrasts objective time,
"which serves as the framework for concrete reality and subjective time,
lived-through time, duration." He separates human life "from concrete
reality and practical activity" and reduces it "to the experiencing of dura-
tion, to the continual flux of states of consciousness," This also explains
Bazin's use of the word "psychologism" in the essay on Cabiria.
UMBERTO D: A GREAT WORK
From France-Observateur, October, 1952
P. 79, Micheline Vian, Temps Modernes, January, 1952. This issue
contains two articles under the general heading "Points of View about
Miracolp a Milano." The first, "The Pink and the Black" is by Rene
Guyonnet. The second is "Toto or the Misfortune of Being an
185
What Is Cinema?
Object." Either Bazin or the printer has in part mistaken the name
of the writer, Michelle-L'Eglise Vian. The article is a brilliant and
witty analysis of the various opinions expressed by the critics and
makes great fun of various shades of party-line interpretations by
them. Bazin clearly took in good part the references to him. Vian
quotes him as saying in L'Observaieur that De Sica has solved to
his own satisfaction the contradiction between social message and
art without betraying art. Bazin himself, she says in this critique, seems
to have solved to his own satisfaction the problem of "running with the
hare and hunting with the hounds" without betraying the mterests
of either.
P. 79, batde of Umherto D.
Bazin is here alluding to the famous episode known as the "battle of
Hernam," a play by Victor Hugo put on at the Comedie Frangaise,
February 25, 1830. A number of distinguished literary figures and
members of the general pubUc demoKstrated violenUy against the
play as representing the new romantic trend in theater. However, the
play survived and triumphed.
CABIRIA: THE VOYAGE TO THE END OF NEOREALISM
From Cahiers du Cinema, November, 1957
P. 84, an effect of vertical gravity. See note on page 76, above.
P. 85, Donnies immediates de la conscience.
This was the title of Bergson's doctoral thesis written in 1888, sub-
sequendy translated into English as Time and Free Will.
IN DEFENSE OF ROSSELLINI
From Cinema Nuovo, August, 1955
P. 97, naturalism and verism.
See A. Ayfre, "Neorealism et Phenomenologie," Cahiers du Cinema,
186
Notes
No. 17, p. 52. This article also appears in Ayfre's Conversion aux
images (Editions du Cerf),
P. 98, St. Januarius.
Early Christian martyr. His body was brought to Naples where his
blood is kept in a glass phial. On certain days of the year the blood
is said to liquefy — an occasion for a Neapolitan celebration.
THE MYTH OF MONSIEUR VERDOUX
From Revue du Cinema, January, 1948
P. 102, Monsieur Verdoux was boycotted by the American Legion in
the United States, received little exhibition, and was withdrawn; it was
a commercial failure in Europe.
P. 102, Siie de Gambais.
Squire of Gambais, which is situated in the Seine-et-Oise and boasts
a beautiful seventeenth-century castle — ^for which it is less generally
known than for the murders committed there by the bluebeard Landru.
P. 104, Princesse de Cleves.
A novel by Madame de la Fayette (1634-1693), considered the fore-
runner of the psychological novel
P. 107, How can you measure his existence by time?
It is interesting to compare this notion with a somewhat similar state-
ment by G. K. Chesterton in his study of Dickens who, he says, did
not strictly make a literature, radier he made a mythology. He did not
always manage to make his characters men, but he always managed
to make them gods. "They are creatures like Punch and Father
Christmas. They live statically in a perpetual summer of being them-
selves."
187
What Is Cinema?
P. 109, The road of hope.
A phrase taken from a film of the same name, reviewed by Bazin
m Cabiers du Cinema (February, 1952). It deals with the hopes of
a group of unemployed Sicilian miners who set out for France to
look for jobs which have been falsely promised to them.
P. 117, crystallization.
A word adopted into French from Stendhal's De I'amour. It refers
both to feelings and ideas. The lover delights in embroidering on the
perfections of the woman he loves, and complacently reflects upon
his happiness. If you put a branch down one of the abandoned mines
in Salzburg, after a while it becomes crystallized — covered with a
profusion of glittering crystals so that the original branch is unrecog-
nizable. Stendhal wrote that he used the word to describe that opera-
tion of the spirit that deduces new perfections from awareness of the
old.
P. 117, The thirteenth woman.
This perhaps says the same thing as Cesare Pavese's remark about
love; '"There is never a first time. The first time is always the second
time."
P, 122, planes of cleavage.
Bazin is referring to the quality of some rocks that break more readily
in some directions than in others. Homothetic=similar and similarly
placed, as any two plane sections of a cone.
LIMELIGHT, OR THE DEATH OF MOLIERE
From L'Obsenateur , November, 1952
P. 126, the lost fame and old age of a man who resemble? him like
a brother.
For a development of this, see "Chaplin, esl-il le frere de Chariot?"
by Barthelemy Amengual, Travail ei Culture, Algiers, 1952. The
IS8
Notes
phrase is also reminiscent of the refrain of the poem La Nuit de decem-
bre by de Musset.
P. 127, buried by torchlight.
Moliere (1622-1673) was taken ill on the stage of the old Palais
Royal theater and was carried to the rooms of a friend where he
died. Actors were forbidden burial in consecrated ground in those
days, but in Moliere's case royal intervention by Louis XIV overrode
ecclesiastical opposition. He was buried at night in a cemetery on the
rue Monlmartre, but no indication was left of his burial place.
THE GRANDEUR OF LIMELIGHT
From Esprit, April, 1953
P. 130, Theramene.
Bazin is referring to the very lengthy speech of Theramene. tutor of
Hippolytus, in the fifth act of Phedre.
P. 131, Nicole Vedres.
This article appeared in Cahiers du Cinema, December, 1952 with
a number of others including one by Lo Duca referred to later in this
essay, in praise of Limelight.
P. 131, Don Juan.
In Cahiers, December, 1952, Jean Renoir describes the joy of Chaplin
at the Comedie Fran?aise as he listened to Don Juan. "This delight
was not feigned. [Chaplin] was at home, and it is always a pleasure
to be with one's own kind."
P. 135,Elio Vittorini.
Born in Sicily 1908. Italian novelist and, after Cesare Pavese, the most
important of the Americanisti of the thirties. Like Pavese, he trans-
lated various American novels into Italian, among them Tortilla Flat.
189
What Is Cinema?
THE WESTERN: OR THE AMERICAN FILM PAR
EXCELLENCE
Preface to J.-L. Rieupeyrout's Le Western ou le cinema americain par
excellence. Editions du Ceri, Paris, 1953.
P. 142, books of hours.
A form of prayer book, originating in the Middle Ages, giving the
hymns, psalms, and prayers to be recited at certain times of the day.
Some, made for the rich and noble, were beautifully illustrated, notably
that of the Due de Berry.
P. 143, Chimene. See note for The Outlaw.
THE ENTOMOLOGY OF THE PIN-UP GIRL
From Ecran Frangais, December 17, 1946.
P. 161, Princesse de Caraman-Chimay.
The princess, from a Belgian family, was an individualist who shocked
society at the turn of the century by claiming her right to do anything
she liked, including posing in the nude. This was at a time when appear-
ing before an audience in a tight-fitting bathing costume was considered
the height of nudity.
THE OUTLAW
From Revue du Cinema, August, 1948.
P. 164, the quest for the Holy Grail.
Some have also seen resemblances between the western and Greek
tragedy. This is one of several occasions on which Bazin draws a
parallel between the western and courtly romances (see also "Eroticism
in the Cinema*').
p. 165, Chimene.
Chimene, the heroine of Comeille's Le Cid, was in love with a young
190
Notes
soldier, who kills her father. Despite her continuing love, she demands
the soldier's death.
EROTICISM IN THE CINEMA
From Cahiers du Cinema, April, 1957.
P. 169, Eroticism and courtly love.
The reference here is to the fact that the relationship of courtly love
had of necessity to be adulterous. In order to be "worshipped" the
lady had to be above her lover in rank. Usually, the object of the
knight's devotion was the wife of his feudal lord, as with Arthur,
Guinevere, and Lancelot, or in the Chatelaine de Vergy.
P. 170, Lo Duca [Joseph-Marie],
Bom Milan 1910. Author, journalist, and director of shorts, among
them one about Louis Lumiere (1949). He was an original member of
the editorial board of Cahiers, from which he withdrew in 1957.
P. 171, Mrs. Grundy.
The French term Bazin uses is "Anastasie" — a name given to the
censorship by artists and writers. She is usually depicted as an u^y
old woman armed with an enormous pair of scissors.
P. 172, Jean Domarchi,
Author of a study on George Cukor in the Editions Seghers series,
and a contributor to Cahiers du Cinema.
P. 173, Palais Royal.
A Parisian theater with a long and varied history from 1783 to the
present. Since 1830 it has been the home of vaudeville.
191
What Is Cinema?
THE DESTINY OF JEAN GABIN
Viom Radio-Cinema-Television, October 1, 1950
P. 177, Tino Rossi,
Born Corsica, 1907. Popular operetta star and film actor. Created
a new style of singing popular songs in contrast to the intellectual
style of most French chamonniers. He was immensely popular and
had fan clubs all over France. Luis Mariani was an imitator of Rossi
in material and style.
RELATED READINGS
Aristarco, G. Storia delle teoriche del film. Einaudi, Torino, 1960.
Ayfre, A. Conversion aux images? Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1964.
Bandelier, A., and Giros, P. Amedee Ayfre. Editions Fleures, Paris, 1968.
Chiarini, L. // film nella battagUa delle idee. FrateUi Bocca Editore> Milano,
1954.
Farber, M., ed. Philosophic Thought in France and the United States.
S.U.N.Y. Press, Albany, 1968 (2d ed.).
Heiney, D. America in Modern Italian Literature. Rutgers, New Bruns-
wick, N. J., 1964.
Maritain, J. Structure of Poetry [Art et scolastique]. Philosophical Library,
New York. 1953.
Mitry, J. Esthethique et psychologic du cinema (2 vols). Editions Uni-
versitares, Paris, 1963-1965.
Moix, C. La Pensee d'Emmanuet Mourner. Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1960.
Mounier, E. Oeuvres, Vok. I-IV. Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1961-1962.
Cahiers du Cinema, 1951-1959.
Cinethique, January-February 1970.
Esprit, January 1949-1957; May 1959.
Revista del cinema italiano, No. 3, March 1954.
Temps Modernes, Les, December 1946-December 1952; October 1970.
192
INDEX
INDEX
Across the Wide Missouri, 153
Adorabks creatures, 79
Aldo, G., 42
Aldrich, Robert, 157
AHemania Anno Zero, 53, 96, 100
Along the Great Divide, 154
"Amalgam, law of the," 23
A more e Fantasie, 94
And God Created Woman, 11 A
Anderson, Lindsay, 94
Anton ioni, Michelangelo, 66
Apache. 157
Arbuckle, Fatty, 104
Aristarco. Goido, 93, 94
Au-deld. des grilles. 176. 177f.
Avventura de Salvator Rosa, tin, 18
Ayfre, Amedee, 2, 97
Ballade des Pendus, 136
Bambini ci guardano, 1, 61
Bandito, II, 18, 20, 32
Barbaro, Ugo, 14
Barrault, Jean-Louis, 119
Beaumarchais, Pierre, 21
Becker. Jacques, 94
Bend of the River, 156
Berdtaeff, Nicholas, 3f,
Bergman. Ingrid, 162
BergsoD, Henri, 4, 85
Brrnanos, Georges, 5
Bite humaine, La, 176
Beutel, Jack. 165
Beyond the Great Divide, 143
Bicycle Thief, See Ladri di Biciclette
Bidone, II, 83ff.
Big Sky, The, 154, 156
Blasetti, Alessandro, 18, 19
Blue Angel, The, 162
Boethius, 12
Boiile de Suif, 144
Brasseur, Pierre, 176
Brave New World, 160
Bremond. Charles, 9
Brief Encounter, 48, 49
Broken Arrow, 151
Broken Blossoms, 161
Broken Lance, 155, 157
Bronco Apache, 151
Cabiria, See Notti di Cahiria
Caccia tragica, La, 45
Cahiers du Cinema, Les, 1, 2, 9, 14. 94,
97, 131, 137
Camerini, M., 72
Camijs, Albert, 3 In.
Cannes film festival, 49
195
Index
Canticle of All Creal£d Things, 14
Came, Marcel, 20, 63, 178
Casque d'or, 94
Cassidy, Hopalong, 141, 143, 152
Cavalcanti, Alberto, 49
Centre Sperimentale di Cmematografia,
17
Cezanne, Paul, 32
Chaplin, Charles, 7, 54. 57, 71, 72, 73,
75, 91, 102ff., 124ff„ 128ff., 146, 176
Chardin, Teilhard de, 4, 5
Chekhov, Anton, 87
Chiarini, Luigi, 48
Cid, Le, 147
del est a vous, Le, 130
Cielo sulla Palude, II, 55, 59
Cinema Nuovo, 93
CinemaScope, 156, 157
Circus, The, 1 10, 111. 112. 115
Ciiizen Kane, 27ff., 42. 43
Citv Lights. 114
Clement, Rene, 178
Cocteau, Jean, 130
Colorado Territory, 154
Communication, 9
Confessions of Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
136
Conversazione in Sicilia, 135
Coogan, Jackie, 55, 111
Coppeau, J., 2
Corneille, Pierre, 130, 147
Corona de ferro, La, 18
Crawford. Joan, 155
Crislo Proibito, 67
Cronaca di un A more, 66
Curtiz. Michael, 149
Daves. Delmer. 151
Day's Pleasure, A, 111
De Rerum Natura, 1
De Santis. Giuseppe, 32, 67
De Srca, Virtorio. !4, 18, 47, 49ff.. 6 Iff.,
79flf.. 87. 90, 96
Depth of focus, 28
Dernikre Chance, La, 23
Demieres vacances, 6
Destry Rides Again, 149
Devil's Doorway, 156
Diary of a Chambermaid, 121
Diderot, Denis, 8
Dietrich, Marlene, 149, 162
Dmytryk, Edward, 155
Documentary, 20, 78, 97
Domarchi. Jean, 172, 174. 175
Don Juan, 131
Dos Passes, John, 31, 39
Dostoievsky, Feodor, 87
Dovjenko, A., 16
Drums Along the Mohawk, 149
Duel in the Sun, 151
Dullin, C, 2
Duvivier, Julien, 94, 178
Dwan, Allan, 153
Dziga-Vertov theory, 64
Easy Street, 111, 115. 118, 119
Eisenslein, Sergei, 13, 16, 23, 25, 42
End of Saint Petersburg, The, 46
Espoir. L', 23, 24
Esprit, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 15, 42
Esquire, 161
Esthetique du Cinima, 13
Etranger, U, 3 In.
Eumpa 51, 96, 101
Existentialism, 4
Fairbanks, Douglas, 143
Far Country, The, 156
Farrebique, 23ff., 41, 42, 43 . 55
Faulkner, William, 31, 34, 39
Fellini. Federico, 14, B3ff.
Feyder, Jacques, 63
Fioretti di San Francisco, I, 96, 99
Flaherty, Robert, 72
For Whom the Bell Tolls, 39
Ford, John, 146, 149, 150, 153
Fort Apache, 150, 151
Fortv-Firsf, The, 170
Fourberies de Scapin, Les, 131
Fruit dSfendu, Le, 79
196
Index
Furthman, Jules, 164
Gabin, Jean, 7, 49. 176ff.
Gable, Clark, 153
Garbo, Greta, 162
Garde, Martin du, 57
Garden of Evil, 157
German expressionism, 16, 26, 67
Gide, Andre, 57
Giorna nella vita, Un, 18
Giovanna d'Arco at rogo, 96
Gish, Lillian, 161
Gold Rush, The, 75. 106, 110, 111,
112, 113, 115. 119. 120. 122
Gozlan, L., 10, 11. 12
Grande adventure du western 1894-
1964, La, 142
Grande Illusion, La, 18
Grant, Gary, 56
Great Dictator, The. 110, 118, 119,
120, 125
Greed, 16
Gremillon, Jean, 130
Grierson, John, 49
Griffith. D. W., 28
Guitry. Sacha, 127. 138
Gunfighter, The, 153
Hart, William, 143
Hathaway, Henry, 157
Hawks, Howard, 154
Hays office, 162, 167
Hayworth, Rita, 162
Hemingway, Ernest, 31, 34, 39. 47
Heraclitus, 12
High Noon, 143, 151, 152. 154
.Hitchcock, Alfred, 76
Hours, Books of, 142
House of Strangers, 155
Hughes, Howard, 151, 164ff.
Huston, Walter, 165
Huxley, Aldous, 160
In nome delta legge, 48
Institut des Hautes Etudes Cmema-
tographiques, 17
Jacques, Christian, 33
Jaspers, Karl, 4
Jeanne d'Arc, 4
leanson, Henri, 178
Johnny Guitar, 155
Jour se live. Le, 177, 178
Kafka, Franz, 73, 137
Kazan, EMa, 156
Keaton, Buster, 135, 139
Kentuckian, The, 157
Keystone shorts. 111
Kid, The, 110, 111. 112, 115, 118
Kid A uto Races at Venice, 111
Kierkegaard, S^ren, 4
King, Henry, 53
Knokke-le-Zoute film festival, 48
Ladd. Alan, 152
Ladri di Biciclette, 14, 49ff., 61, 62, 67ff.
Lancaster, Burt, 157
Lang, Fritz, 67. 149, 157
Langdon, Harry, 139
LaShelle, Joseph, 157
Lattuada, Alberto, 18, 19, 32, 66, 96
Lean, David. 49
Leenhardt, Roger, 2, 6, 58
Lenin, V. I.. 12. 14
Limelight, 8, 9. 124ff., 128ff.
Little Foxes. The. 10
Lo Sceicco bianco, 84
LoDuca, Joseph-Marie. 135, 170, 171
Louisiana Story, 5
Lucretius, 7
McCarthyism, 151, 153
Magnani, Anna, 22, 24
Malade imaginaire, Le, 128
MaJaparte, Curzto, 67
Malraux, Andr£, 6, 7, 23. 31, 47. 104,
169
Man Without a Star, 157
Mankewicz, Joseph, 155
Mann, Anthony, 156, 157
Mariano, Luis, 177
197
Index
Marie du Port, La. 178
Maritain, Jacques, 4
Marshall, George, 149
Marx, Karl, 4
Mascalzoni, I, 181
Masina, Giuliella, 91
Matisse, Henri, 33, 101
Maupassant, Guy de. 144
Mauriac, Claude, 137
Melies, Georges, 161
Meyer, Jean, 13 1
Michi, Maria, 22
Miracolo a Milano, 61, 62, 67ff., 79
Misanthrope, Le, 127
Mitrv, Jean, 12, 13
Mix,' Tom, 143. 152
Modern Times, 103, 113. 115, 119. 139
Moffat, Natalie, 8f.
Moliere, 104, 105, 124, 127, 128, 130,
131. 176
Monroe, Marilyn, 172
Monsieur Verdoux, 1, 8, 9, 72, I02ff.,
125, 128, 129, 136, 165
Montage, 15, 25. 42, 43, 64, 66
Morgan, Michele, 176
Mother. 56
Mounier, Emmanuel, 3, 4, 5, 11, 14
Murphy, Audie, 149n.
My Darling Clememine, 150
Naked Spur, The, 156
Nave Bianca, La, 17
Nibelungen, Die, 16
Northwest Passage. 149
Nosferatu, 16
Notti di Cabiria, Le, 18, 83ff.
Open City, See Roma Citii Aperta
Oro di Napoli, La. 100
Outlaw, The, 151, 163ff.
Overlanders, The, 141
Oxbow Incident, The, 151
Paisa. 16ff.. 43, 45, 47, 51, 53, 55. 62,
96, 97
Pane, 94
Paradoxe du comedien, Le, 8
Parents terrible, Les, 130
Parmenides, 12
Partie de campagne, La, 121
Passionate Friends, The, 49
Patto col diavolo, 11, 48
Paura, La, 96
Peck, Gregory, 153
Peguy, Charles, 4, 5
Pepe le Moko, 178
Perier, Francois, 84, 85, 86
Personalism, 3, 11
Picasso, Pablo, 89
Piccolo Mondo Antico, 19
Pilgrim, 112, 115, 118. 122, 146
Pi sea tor, 46
Plato. 12
Positif, 1, 10
Poiemkin, 13, 16, 25, 42, 46
Preminger, Otto, 157
Prevert, Jacques, 63, 178
Propaganda, 51
Proust, Marcel, 58. 78
Psychoanalysis, 71
Pudovkin. V, I., 16
Pursued, 154
Purviance, Edna, 114, 115, 116, 117.
118
Quai des Brumes, 176
Quattro passi fra le nuvole, 18, 48, 50
Quo Vadis? 18
Racine, Jean, 130
Rancho Notorious, 157
Ray, Nicholas, 155, 157
Raye, Martha, 116, 117
Red River, 154. 156
Regie du jeu. La, 121
Renoir, Jean, 1, 18n.. 72, 121
Return of Frank James, The, 149
Rjeupeyrout, J.-L.. 142, 143, 150
Rio Grande, 153
River of No Return, 157
198
Index
Road to Life. The, 23
Roma Cittd Aperta, 16ff., 47, 62. 96
Rope, 76
Rossellini, Roberto, 13, 14, 16ff., 41.
47, 62, 66, 87, 93ff.
Rossi, Tino, 177
Rotha, Paul, 49
Rouquier, Georges, 23fF,, 41, 42, 44, 55
Rousseau, Jean- Jacques, 136
Run for Cover. 155
Russell, Jane, 163fF.
Sadoul, Georges, 6, 16
Sallustius, 12
Santa Fe Trail, The, 149
Saroyan, William. 34, 40
Sartre, Jean Paul. 3 In., 85
Saskatchewan, 154
Scarf ace, 140, 141
Scipio Africanus, 18, 48
Sciusca, 16ff., 47, 50, 61, 62
Sea of Gross, 156
Sennett, Mack, 104, 139, 161
Seven-Year Itch, The, 172
Shane, 151, 152. 155
Shoulder Arms, 118, 119
Sight and Sound, 94
Silver Lode, 153
Simon, Michel, 176
Sketch for a Psychology of the Motion
Picture. 6
SOC 103, 17
Socialist realism. 18
Soldati, Mario, 19
Sole Sorge A ncora, 11, 20
Sortilege. 33
Souvenirs et notes de travail d'un
acteur, 2
Soviet cinema. 16, 23, 42, 64, 67. 148,
170
Stagecoach, 144, 146, 149
Stazione Termini, 96
Sternberg, Josef von, 174
Stevens, George, 152, 155
Stewart. James, 156
Strada, La, 14, 83 ff., 95
Stroheim, See Von Stroheim
Stromboli, 96
Sturges, Preston, 167
Suares, Andr6, 72
Sucksdorff, Arne, 42
Sullivan's Travels, 167
Sunny side, 115
Tabu, 23, 24, 56
Tarzan, 143
Taylor, Robert, 156
Tellaney, Jean Louis, 6
Temps Modernes, Les, 8, 9, 10, 79, 103
Terra Trema, La, 4 Iff., 55, 59, 99
Thunder over Mexico, 56
Tisse, E., 25
Toland, Greg, 164, 167
Touchard, P. -A., 2, 5
Tracy, Spencer, 156
Trial. The, 108
Truffaut, Frangois, 1, 6
Umberto D, 15. 73, 76, 77, 78, 79ff.,
90. 96
Underworld. 140
Van Gogh, Vincent, 32, 137
Vedres, Nicole, 131
Venice film festival, 17, 44, 48, 157
Vera Cruz, 157
Vergano, Aldo. 32
Verm Orel, Claude, 2
Viaggio in Italia, 95, 96, 98, 100
Vian, Micheline, 79
Vidor, King. 149, 151, 157
Vigo, Jean, 72, 135
Villon, Frangois, 136
Virginia City. 149
Visconti. Luchjno. 41ff., 55, 67, 99
Vitelloni, /, 84. 86. 89, 90
Vittorinl E?ie, 40, 135
Vivere in Pace, 20, 48, 50
Von Stroheim, Erich, 135, 139, 174
199
Index
Walsh, Raoul, 154, 156
Welles, Orson. 27ff., 43
Wcllman, William, 151. 153
West, Mae, 162
Western Union, 149
Westerner, The. 149, 156, 164
Westward the Women, 153
Woman of Paris, A. 117, 121
Wood, Sam, 39
Wyler, William, 10, 149, 164
Xenophanes, 11
Yank, 161
Yellow Sky, 143
Zavattini, Cesare, 14, 53ff., 63ff., 79ff.,
90
Zimmer, Christian, 10, 11. 12, 13
Zinnemann, Fred, 151, 152
Zola, Emile, 98
200
Film
bazin
"Although his name is still unknown to many Americans who love
the movies, the late Andre Bazin was one of the greatest film ■
and very likely the most influential of them all. . . .The first \
What is Cinema? was simultaneously basic and complex, rigi
open, alenost the Poetics of movies; and as a follow-up these new!
ays are not a ' ^ent In thf "
,. i Gray, these I , v '^irurturerl
vet exhilarating reading ... both vok Cinewd
rich in distilled insights, and anybody interested in movies and mu^
rriliri^m should hax'e accfss \n [hem/'—librarv journc]!
"Bazin s criticism is valuable lor ils uv\n exploration ol the nature and
possibilities of film, as well as for an understanding of the esthetic
background of that explosion of movie-making energy called th
New Wave. At his best he stirs the reader to make his own way,
either in theory or in practice, into the questions Bazin has opi^rv d
up. At one point he writes, 'In sterile periods theory is a fruitful
for the analysis of the causes of the drought, and it can help cieaie
the conditions necessary for ihr- rphirth.' In our own sterile period
when intellectual and estheti< Mousness have been added i-
the old pomposities of the Hollywood film, we need to look at films
again with Bazin's flexible appreciation and his rigorfn^ '.or->^,f' .vf
critical purpose."— New York Times Book Review
BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA i^-f/ZU
ISBN 0-520-02255-6