FONTE: https://archive.org/stream/TheSecretLanguageOfFilm/The%20Secret%20Language%20of%20Film!%20_djvu.txt
URL: https://archive.org/stream/TheSecretLanguageOfFilm/The%20Secret%20Language%20of%20Film!%20_djvu.txt

T H £%
sec r %f
A N G
G
ClVIViW
ajuswim.
BOSTON
PUBLIC
LIBRARY
THE
SECRET
LANGUAGE
OF FILM
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2015
https://archive.org/details/secretlanguageofOOcarr
JEAN-CLAUDE CARRIERE
T H E
SECRET
LANGUAGE
OF FILM
Translated from the
French by Jeremy Leggatt
A C o r n e l i a h- M i c h a e l B e s s i e B o o k
Pantheon Books New York
Translation copyright £> 1994 by Random House, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan- American
Copyright Conventions. Pul dished in the United States
try Pantheon Books, a division of Random House* Inc.,
New York, and simultaneously in Canada hy Random
Hmi.se of Canada Limited. Toronto. Translated from an
unpublished French manuscript by Jean -Claude Carrie re.
Copyright by Jcan-Claudc ( iaoiere. All rights reserved.
Library £ >f ( ' < rr i gres s f ’ ata I og i n g- i n- Pi i hi i cat i< ) 1 i D ata
Camere* Jean -Claude, 1931 -
[Le film qu’on ne voit pas. English]
The secret language of film / Jean-Claude Carriore ;
translated from the French bv Jeremy Leggait.
p. cm.
A Cornelia if Michael Bessie book.”
ISBN 6-679-42 1 16-5
1, Motion pictures. I. Title.
PN1994.C33913 1994
791.43 — dc20 94-775
BOOK D E S 1 O N H Y \T , K II I S I K \ bS E A H fi E
Mann factored in the United States of America
First Edition
987 654321
CONTENTS
Introduction
3
A Few Words About a Language
7
Reality in Flight
47
Time Dissected
105
The Va n is hi ng S creenp I a y
147
Trims
189
The Fog of Images
21 9
THE
SECRET
LANGUAGE
OF FILM
INTRODUCTION
I n tlie years following the First World War, French
colonial administrators in Africa frequently put on
film shows. Their aim was of course to amuse, to enter-
tain in the latest style, hut it was also to demonstrate to
subject African populations the unassailable supremacy
of the white nations. The cinema, one recent invention
among many of the industrial West, was the product of
a historic encounter of theatre, vaudeville, music hall,
painting, photography, and a whole series of technical
advances. As such, it helped sing the praises of the white
middle-class civilization that had given it birth.
A sheet was stretched between posts, the mysterious
device was carefully set up, and suddenly, out in the dry
night of the African hush, moving pictures appeared.
African notables and religious leaders invited to
these performances could hardly refuse to attend: such a
3
/ ntroduction
breach of manners would surely be interpreted as un-
friendly or even rebellious. So they and their retainers
came. But since these dignitaries were for the most
part Muslim, a long and strict tradition forbade them to
depict the human face and form, God s creation. Did
that ancient prohibition also apply to this new kind of
representation?
Some believers sincerely thought so. They diplomat-
ically accepted official invitations, shook French hands,
and took the seats reserved for them. When the lights
went down and the first beams flickered from the curious
apparatus, they shut their eyes and kept them shut
throughout the performance. They were there and not
there. They were present, but they saw nothing,
1 have often wondered what invisible, soundless film
was shown during those lew short hours. What went on
behind those African eyelids? Images pursue us even
when our eyes are closed. We can neither escape nor
obliterate them. In the case of the Africans, what was
seen? By whom? And how?
And sometimes I think we ourselves are not very
different from those African Muslims when we go to see
a film. Unlike them, we keep our eyes open in the dark,
or we think we do. But do we not harbor deep within us
some taboo or habit or faculty or obsession that blinds
us to all or to part of the audiovisual band that flickers
Meeting] y before us?
How many times could we say, of ourselves or of
others, that a film has not been seen, or truly seen? For
many reasons, some of which are unclear and some we
cannot admit to, we see imperfectly. We refuse to see, or
else we see something else. There is in every film a
4
/ n trod net ion
region of shadow, a stockpile of the riot-seen. It can he
put there by its authors, knowingly and deliberately.
And it can be brought there during a performance by a
particular spectator (just one spectator who on that one
day is unable or refuses to see everything), or else by
that remarkably cohesive group whose reactions are col-
lective even when unpredictable, the entity known as
the audience,
Some people believe that in a museum one should
move as quickly as possible from one painting to an-
other, never lingering lest a fresh and powerful impres-
sion give way to cold analysis. Some pundits even advise
us not to read books, merely listen to people speaking
about them.
Such paradoxes are difficult to apply to cinema. 1 can,
of course, choose to see only part of a film; I can leave
the movie house; or I can stay to see the film a second
time. But I cannot see it more or less slowly than the
people around me. We are traveling on the same train.
This book, the fruit of a career that almost always
favors action over reflection, has no other purpose than
to help us — if we so desire— to open our eyes a little
wider.
5
A FEW WORDS
ABOUT A LANGUAGE
I n those same African lands, in the early days of
cinema, when less intransigent spectators did
open their eyes to the novel spectacle, they understood
it only with difficulty. Even when they recognized a few
of these images from elsewhere — a car, a man, a woman,
a horse — they could not connect them. The action, the
story, eluded them. Raised in a rich and vital oral tradi-
tion, they could not adapt to this succession of silent
images, the absolute opposite of what they were used to.
They were baffled. A man had to be stationed by the
screen for the duration of the film to explain the action*
Luis Runnel even encountered this custom (which sur-
vived in Africa into the 1950s) during his childhood in
Spain, around 1908 or 1910. A standing man armed with
a long pointer picked out the characters on the screen
and explained what they were doing. He was called the
■
/ £.' a n - C l a u d e C a r ri e re
expUcador, He vanished — from Spain at least — around
1920 ,
1 imagine that examples of this kind crop up more or
less everywhere. For the cinema had brought with it a
new — an utterly new — language, which few spectators
could absorb without effort, without help.
This was not the case at the very beginning (or so at
least we assume). In the first ten years, a film was still
just a sequence of static shots, the direct offspring of
the theatrical vision. Events necessarily followed one
another in unbroken sequence within that static frame-
work, and yon could follow the action quite easily. The
first audience reaction was of another kind: people won-
dered exactly what this moving image was made of;
seeing in it a kind of new reality, they looked for illusion,
for the trick. But once past the first gasp, once it was
clear that the Lumiere Brothers* train was not going to
squash spectators flat, audiences quickly grasped the or-
derly reel-by-reel sequence of events, fictitious or imagi-
nary, unfolding before a stationary camera. After all, it
was not unlike what went on in the theatre, where the
stage was static and clearly demarcated. Characters en-
tered that frame, met each other, and exchanged ges-
tures, or rather signals. When they left the camera* s field,
it was as if they were exiting to the wings, And since
they lacked speech and (almost always) color, lofty
minds concluded that the whole thing was decidedly
inferior to real theatre*
An authentically new language did not emerge until
filmmakers started to break the film up into successive
scenes, until the birth of montage, of editing. It was here,
in the invisible relationship of one scene to the next, that
8
*
Th e S e c re t Languag e of F i I m
cinema truly sired a new language. In the heat of its
own implementation, this seemingly simple technique
generated a vocabulary and grammar of unbelievable di-
versity, No other medium boasts such a process.
We can attempt to describe it first in elementary
terms, A man, in a closed room, approaches a window
and looks out, Another image, another “shot/’ succeeds
the first. We are shown the street, where we see two
characters — the man s wife, for instance, and her lover.
For us today the very juxtaposition of those two im-
ages, in that order, and even in the inverse order (begin-
ning in the street), clearly tells us, without our needing
to think about it, that the man, through the window, sees
the wife and lover in the street. We know- we see him in
the act of seeing. We effortlessly and correctly interpret
those juxtaposed images, that language. We no longer
even notice this elementary, automatic, reflexive link-
age; like a kind of extra sense, this aptitude is now part
of our perceptual system. Eighty years ago, however,
it constituted a discreet but real revolution; hence the
essential role of the explicador ; following the characters
with his pointer and saying, 'The man looks through the
window , . , Me sees his wife with another man in the
s treet , . / An d pe r h aps , i f th e ti e x t p i ct u re for e x am p 1 e
showed the watching husband's enraged face, close to
the camera this time (a new act of daring, new change
of angle, new size of picture, new use of space), the ex pli-
ca dor would go on: “The man is furious. He has just
recognized his wife's lover. He thinks murderous
thoughts
From the first sequences of drawings by prehistoric
artists right down to the magic lantern’s succession of
f)
Jea n-Cla tide Ca rriere
slides, the human hand and eye have toiled tirelessly
and sometimes with astonishing success to show us the
impossible — to show us movement in a static image.
From that standpoint alone, the cinema represented a
prodigious technical leap.
But the true innovation — sweeping, never before
seen and perhaps never dreamed of — lay in the juxtapo-
sition of two animated scenes, one of which canceled out
its predecessor by following it.
Let ns stay for a moment with the man who spies his
nemesis through the window. Now the wife takes leave
of her lover and turns toward home. Sim looks up, sees
her husband at the window, and freezes. We can almost
feel her heart pounding.
If at this moment the husband is filmed from the
wife's point of view, from directly below, he will inevita-
bly look threatening, overwhelming. The camera posi-
tion alone will produce this effect, irrespective of our
own feelings* And on the other hand, if we see the wife
from the husband's standpoint, from above, she will look
fearful, vulnerable, guilty,
Let us imagine that the scene takes place at night. 11
the director decides to place his lights so that the hus-
band s face is lit from below, making teeth glitter, exag-
gerating cheekbones and brow ridges (a staple of horror
movies), the man will look cruel and terrifying. Soft, im-
pressionistic lighting can, on the other hand, make him
look forgiving. Comedy has always called for blight,
cheerful lighting: frivolity slums gloom. Entertainment
shies from harsh contrasts — or it used to, for here too
fashions are changing fast. It is all part of the living and
maturing of a language.
10
*
Th e S e c re t Languag e of F i I m
cinema truly sired a new language. In the heat of its
own implementation, this seemingly simple technique
generated a vocabulary and grammar of unbelievable di-
versity, No other medium boasts such a process.
We can attempt to describe it first in elementary
terms, A man, in a closed room, approaches a window
and looks out, Another image, another “shot/’ succeeds
the first. We are shown the street, where we see two
characters — the man s wife, for instance, and her lover.
For us today the very juxtaposition of those two im-
ages, in that order, and even in the inverse order (begin-
ning in the street), clearly tells us, without our needing
to think about it, that the man, through the window, sees
the wife and lover in the street. We know- we see him in
the act of seeing. We effortlessly and correctly interpret
those juxtaposed images, that language. We no longer
even notice this elementary, automatic, reflexive link-
age; like a kind of extra sense, this aptitude is now part
of our perceptual system. Eighty years ago, however,
it constituted a discreet but real revolution; hence the
essential role of the explicador ; following the characters
with his pointer and saying, 'The man looks through the
window , . , Me sees his wife with another man in the
s treet , . / An d pe r h aps , i f th e ti e x t p i ct u re for e x am p 1 e
showed the watching husband's enraged face, close to
the camera this time (a new act of daring, new change
of angle, new size of picture, new use of space), the ex pli-
ca dor would go on: “The man is furious. He has just
recognized his wife's lover. He thinks murderous
thoughts
From the first sequences of drawings by prehistoric
artists right down to the magic lantern’s succession of
f)
The Sec: ret Language of Film
To return lor a moment to our trio. This example, as
simple as it is possible to get, can instantly turn compli-
cated, for the cinema, armed with new weapons of obvi-
ous potential, had soon thrust its way into the world of
the mind, into the imaginings, memories, and dreams ot
its characters. Especially silent cinema, w hich possessed
neither dialogue nor soliloquy to inform us about feel-
ings (the husband's anger, for example) or about more
secret thoughts, about everything we call state of
mind/ Thus, in the space of a few short years, empiri-
cally, with both failures and successes, the most aston-
ishing of grammars was elaborated.
A fairly primitive code soon emerged. If, after the
shot of his irate face, we see the man savagely strangling
his wife, we can assume that this is real, that we are
witnessing the predictable outcome in the conjugal bed-
room a few hours later. But if, after that bedroom scene,
we return to the irate (ace, to the husband still looking
through the same window and seeing the same charac-
ters on the street, a kind of secret instinct tells us that
the strangling scene did not really happen, that it was
inserted simply to show us the wronged husband s fan-
tasy, his secret wish, perhaps even his firm intention, but
one which he has not yet carried out.
If the authors of the film want us to know immedi-
ately that this takes place in the mind, they could even
make use of a mechanical device, make the picture wob-
ble or gently dissolve or cloud over. This outward
change, however naive or elementary it may seem today,
was enough to tell certain audiences that a brief flight
horn reality was taking place.
Lot ns imagine another device. The man looks into
11
/ e a n - t l a u d e C a r r i e re
the street, we see what he sees, then wife and lover fade
suddenly into the air and vanish. Now we see the empty
street, We return to the mans face, and down that face a
tear trickles.
Here we had not witnessed a real scene, but an illu-
sion, The unhappy husband (or possibly widower) was
looking at a scene that had taken place on that same spot
a little bit earlier.
And so on: he could have seen himself beside the
woman- could have seen a skull beneath the lover s hat
when the latter turned to face the window; or suddenly
have seen a woman other than his wife, wearing the
same clothes. In each case the sequence taken as a whole
would have told a different story, and the new language
would have adapted to fit it.
Thus cinema creates a new space with a simple shift
of viewpoint. For example, a man's eyes roam over a
crowd, then stop. If at this point we move immediately
to another character, we know the first man is looking at
him. Something — if the directions of the gaze are well
established- — demonstrates that relationship beyond a
doubt.
The second character is detached, isolated: whether
he realizes it or not, he is put into a direct relationship
with the first man. An illusory relationship (for they are
not in the same picture), but a strong and unmistakable
one.
Nothing in the history of artistic expression had sug-
gested that such a re lationship-by -juxtaposition might
ever be possible,
These narrative procedures, these pairings, these im-
pressions, the new forms given to feelings by these as-
12
Til e S e c rv t La n g u a g e o / Filin
tonisliing linkages and dislocations ot image, were
received in the early 1920s with amazement and passion-
ate enthusiasm, attested a thousand times over. In 1923,
still a student in Madrid along with Federico Garcia
Lorca and Salvador Dali, Luis Buhuel sent to Paris for
reels illustrating these and other techniques, such as ac-
celerated-motion filming, image by image, that allowed
you to see what had never been seen, for example the
germination and growth of a plant. Full of enthusiasm,
he organized lectures in Madrid and personally intro-
duced these wonders. A little later, in 1926, Jean Epstein
wrote: The grammar of film is peculiar to film.
Everyone was amazed. After a .quarter-century as
peepshow entertainment, generally denigrated by the
arbiters of task*, the cinema was finally hailed as the
latest art form, a form sure to eclipse all others. An Amer-
ican critic, who saw the camera as a machine for turning
time into space and vice versa, was soberly calling cin-
ema ‘'the greatest philosophical surprise since Kant
Mere, beyond a doubt, was a truly new language, so
much so that the particular effects it used soon became
conventional international signs, a sort of planetary code.
You manipulated the image differently according to
whether you wanted to suggest a dream (in which ease
the subject's eyes first closed), recollection, or the urge
to act. The performer s face, particularly his eyes, pro-
jected and received signs which organized the narrative
and established feelings. The images spoke around his
gaze.
And they spoke for everyone. Unlike writing, in
which words always conform to a code you have to know
or decipher (you team to read and write), the moving
13
/ e a n - C l a u d e C a r ri e re
image was within everyone’s reach, A language not only
new hut universal: an ancient dream.
Little by little, as cinema aged— and it aged at top
speed, swept along by the momentum of this swiftest-
moving of centuries- — these writerly procedures that
made tip the new language tended to take a back seat
almost to disappear. As if, having quickly become a fa-
miliar part ol our personal baggage, they were no longer
deemed necessary. A language scarcely bom was already
dying. In Belle de Jour in 1966, Luis Bunuel abruptly
interrupted a scene of Catherine Deneuve climbing a
staircase in an unknown house to show a scene in which
a little girl appears. He did it without any noticeable
change in the image, without any kind of signal (wobble,
blur, dissolve, switch from color to black and white) to
tell us — as would have been the case thirty years earlier
— that we were leaving the story's mainstream. And yet
we know at once (“we” meaning here in Europe and in
the United States, but possibly not elsewhere), and with
virtually no possibility' of error, that this little girl is
Severn ie herself, the character played by Catherine
Deneuve, hut Seven ue as a little girl. With the sudden-
ness and impertinence that can mark our most personal
feelings, these visual memories have assailed her as she
goes up this very ordinary staircase.
In the case of Belle de Jour we are helped by a voice,
the mother s. As the memory-frame opens she calls the
little girl by her name: “Severine!” Since we already
know the character's first name, this cry (unavailable to
the makers of silent film, who would have had to seek a
different and possibly more creative solution), this cry
orients us painlessly. Today it looks almost too pat. Al-
14
Th e S e c re i Language of F i f m
most thirty years later, in 1993, this 1960s- style signpost
would probably in its turn seem unnecessary and would
be dropped. And Bufuiel might perhaps move from one
image to the other without any precaution of this kind,
as he has done in The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoi-
sie, as others do.
The astonishing thing is that as our century pro-
gresses we are still somehow managing to keep up with
this bizarre linguistic evolution. What is at work here is
a circular, hidden relationship between those who make
and those who view films, an area no one ever sees but
which is the prov ince of many eyes. The makers of films,
who are themselves viewers of films made by others,
have a rough idea of whether or not they will he under-
stood by their contemporaries. The latter, for their part,
adapt (unwittingly, often unconsciously) to forms of ex-
pression which briefly seem daring but quickly become
commonplace. The first man to make the image waver in
order to signal a shift in perception was a genius of a
kind. The second copied the first, perhaps improving on
the process. By the third time the trick was already a
cliche.
In a visual medium nothing is more immediately per-
ceived by an audience than an old familiar trick, some-
thing already seen, something already done. Audiences
either reject it or welcome it as an old friend, The famil-
iar is comfortable and reassuring. Others have used it (a
director might say), so why shouldn’t I? But it can also
bore an audience, impair its concentration. A calculated
risk. Clearly we cannot invent a whole new written lan-
guage for every book. But a language in a state of perma-
nent self-discovery, a language permanently shaping and
15
/ e a u -C la u d e C a r r i r re
enriching itself, obviously cannot just rehash the same
old ingredients* It would soon degenerate into empty
words. It must innovate, dare— and occasionally fail — to
tell and to show.
Almost at the outset of the adventure, filmmakers re-
alized that memory for images can sometimes he
stronger and more enduring than for words and senten-
ces. We remember a woman’s white body, or a fire
aboard a red ocean liner, more accurately and probably
more vividlv than words that more or less well describe
that body or that blazing ship. We are in any case dealing
with a different order o( memory, another rnernorv alto-
* v
gether, which different peoples can share no matter what
language they speak.
All expression — pictorial, theatrical, or merely social
— lives on acknowledged or unacknowledged memories,
personal reminiscences, a private or communal treas-
ury that glitters brightly for some and less so for others.
And everyone finds his voice, his stance, or his color-
ation in these deep woods we all inhabit — a stance and
coloration which others will one day rediscover and
remember.
The cinema made lavish use of all that had gone be-
fore. When it was given speech in 1930 it called on the
services of writers- when color came along it enlisted
painters; it turned to musicians and architects. Each con-
tributed his own vision, his own v oice.
But it fashioned itself first and foremost from itself.
It invented itself and at once copied itself, reinvented
itself, and so forth, ft even invented hitherto unknown
trades; cameraman, director, editor, sound engineer,
who all gradually sharpened and perfected their tools.
16
The Secret Language of Film
And it was through the repetition of forms, through daily
contact with all kinds of audiences, that the language
took shape and branched out, with each great filmmaker
in his own way enriching the vast invisible dictionary
we all now consult. A language that goes on changing
week by week and day by day, the swift-moving reflec-
tion of those obscure, many-faceted, complex and contra-
dictory relationships that are the unique connective
tissue of human societies.
And how very swift-moving!
In less than half a century, the cinema has lived
through everything that happened between Racine s so-
liloquies and Surrealist poetry, between Giotto s fres-
coes and Kandinsky's paintings. It is an art on the move,
a hurried art, a ceaselessly jostled and dislocated art, and
this sometimes leads filmmakers to see profound change
in mere syntactical shifts, in new equipment, satellite
broadcasting, electronic imaging. This wealth of inven-
tion, which film has known since its beginnings, this
apparently unlimited extension of the language s instru-
ments (although not of the language itself, which, as we
shall see, keeps on running up against the same barriers),
often engenders a kind of intoxication which once again
leads us to mistake technique for thought technique for
emotion, technique for knowledge. We mistake the out-
ward signs of change for the underlying essence of film,
and the astounding proliferation of images following us
wherever we go only heightens the intoxication and fur-
ther blurs the essential. How often have we heard (and
said); there is nothing film cannot do or show! Other art
forms seem to lag far behind, out of breath, exhausted.
Constantly dazzled by technical progress, we filmmakers
17
] e a n -Chiu d e C J a r r i e re
tend to forget substance and meaning — which are true
and rare — and see only the same routines repeated in
the latest technological disguise. We believe we are
looking, but we delude ourselves. Without knowing it,
we are like those African dignitaries: having too much to
see, our eyes often no longer see at all.
lie nee this confusion we see all around us, this sense
of constant “revolution, of fever and dissatisfaction, of
an almost pathological compulsion to change outward
forms — and to mistake the process for true change.
There is no young answer to the old question. The
evolution of cinematographic language, particularly of
montage, has been swift and far-reaching, So much so
that in pretelevision days newly released prison inmates,
starved of films for ten years or so, often had trouble
grasping what happened on cinema screens. The new
films moved too fast for therm
With the video — a barely comprehensible genre in
which shapes are too fleetinglv perceived for us to ap-
preciate or even identify them — that evolution has en-
tered an entirely new phase. Accelerated montage
effects are scarcely new (they have been around since
1920), but for a long time they were merely aesthetic
experiments, akin to abstract painting or to atonal music.
Hand in glove with the more extreme forms of pop
music, however, these same montage effects have moved
center stage. The sound volume of these clips remains
fairly constant (in other w ords extremely high) no matter
how far we are from musicians and singers, but the im-
ages follow one another in a series of unexpected jolts,
in spasmodic shifts of shape and angle. It is as if they
sought to fragment and scatter our powers of perception,
IS
I h e S e c re t L a ng u a g e v f F i l m
with the apparent intention of eliminating awareness
and perhaps even vision.
It is a language both dislocated and effusive.. It
makes no demands on the mind, for it seeks to deny
brain and eye the time they need to establish contact,
just as it seeks to short-circuit tire optic nerve, stimulat-
ing vision and hearing directly, without benefit of a mid-
dleman. As if to say: this is as far as I go; this is where I
stop; von no longer perceive me, you merely set and
hear me,
Seeing without looking, hearing without listening.
In the manic frenzy of some videos, there is the sinister
vision of a prison in. which crazed inmates thrash about.
There they are, penned inside that flat, projected image
bv the borders of the TV or cinema screen. Searchlights
glare from the watchtowers, and the captive singers
seem to howl their physical despair at being only images
in a cage.
I have just spoken of the brain, which misses nothing,
even though it can sometimes be dulled and lulled.
Those who have studied the brain (Gerald Edelmun calls
it "the most complex object in the universe ) say that the
center ol language is located on the left, where reason,
logic, memory, and the intelligent linking of ideas and
perceptions occur. Visual capacity, on the other hand,
lives on the right, along with imagination, intuition, and
music.
Proper brain function supposes that the two hemi-
spheres work in harmony through countless small, swift
linkages. If that is true, then no brain functions on a
19
J e a n-Cl a u d e C a r r i e re
broader front or with more intensity than that of a great
filmmaker, constantly required to fuse the verbal and the
visual*
H owever, the Japanese are said to have their lan-
guage center on the right, together with images and
music. Everything on the same side — which does not
stop them making films every bit as good as ours!
I have just written a quite brief passage about the brain,
using a conventional typographical device to separate it
from what precedes and what follows it. When such a
device appears in midchapter it suggests — but does not
mandate— a break. I appear to have reached the end of
one phase of my writing and to be ready to begin an-
other. The reader may close the book and take a breather
before going on — always supposing he wants to go on.
1 can think of no cinematic equivalent for this kind
of pause, for this identifying peculiarity of written lan-
guage. Its duration is at the reader s discretion \ I use it
hi my own books because I like coming across it in other
peoples books. First of all, while viewing a film 1 cannot
stop along the way (unless I have it on a cassette). I
accept the requirement of viewer passivity; I let myself
go, and like the rest of the audience I am swept along. If
the director inserts a physical break in a film — a series of
black-and-w hite images, for example (or a commercial) —
he commits an arbitrary act whose high-handedness may
jolt and irritate me, an act I might well reject In a book,
the eye can disregard the suggested break and leap for-
ward at once to the continuation of the text. In a film, the
break becomes mandatory, and space is transformed into
20
The Secret Language of Film
time. And that time threatens to disrupt the narrative, to
undermine its interest, even though the filmmaker may
consider this moment's respite essential, a sort of way-
side halt within the story to view a sunset or a sublime
landscape.
But it has its risks. Ever higher risks, Screenplays
dropped off at French television studios are often dis-
figured by script editors with the red-pencil margin
warning danger tie zapping, roughly translatable as 1k -
ware channel-hopping/ 5 Meaning, cut to the chase! step
up the pace! don’t dilly-dally! the other networks are
breathing down our necks, let s not waste time and lose
viewers with all this soporific beauty !
And if I am at home one evening watching a film on
TV (for that is where we usually see films, or see them
for the second time) and I lose patience with the kind
of lull I have gradually grown unaccustomed to, or am
annoyed by the intrusion of an unwanted commercial, I
quickly switch to another channel with the remote con-
trol. And il I find an arresting picture there, l forget all
about the first film; the new one has my whole attention.
But of course 1 am just as likely to drop this channel in
favor of a third, and so on. Thus— an accidental author
abetted by chance— J recreate singlehanded the welter
of pictures and sounds that now make up the fabric of so
many of our evenings. Channel-hopping has become an
objective form of creation. Like it or not, the small black
remote -control device is the latest personal filmmaking
tool.
By the same token, this individual achievement,
which in certain eases might already be called self-
expression, and which may one day he designated art.
21
/ e a n - C I a u d e C a r r i e re
this 1 'personal statement" made by pressing the remote-
control switch, almost always unconsciously, is state-of-
the-art cinematographic creation; the very latest avatar
of a language unknown to ns a hundred years ago.
In the early days, cinema wrote before it knew how to
write, before it even knew it was writing. The language’s
Eden.
As a we II -constructed screenplay, action preceded
intention. Only one tiling counted: solving technical
problems in order to tell a story clearly. Filmmaking
launched boldly into the adventure. Just like a man
forced to make his own way in life, or like a man ma-
rooned in a wild land of unknown customs and language,
and who gradually discovers ways of making himself un-
derstood, of involving others, of getting by with their
help.
In the beginning, obviously, the whole point was to
show everything. No shadow zones in the picture. Broad
static shots, simple mov ememts, unambiguous emotions.
The triumph of the seen. Actors exaggerated every move,
rolled their eyes, wrung their hands. They were urged
to make situation and action crystal-clear, and in any case
they were the heirs of a theatrical tradition that favored
declamation and posturing, that for example barred
women — simply as a matter of elegance and propriety
— from dropping their hands below 7 the waist. So now,
frustrated of the chance to declaim, they compensated to
the best of their ability. Posture was also a means of
expression; movement was a sign. They wore exagger-
ated makeup. Four or five basic feelings were enough.
22
Th e S e c re t L a n g u a g v of / f i f in
And directors turned films out at top speed; there was no
time to polish. That would come later, when the cinema
discovered mystery and equivocation, when it discov-
ered all the things that no longer needed to be shown.
But back then, with the help of painted backdrops, Ben-
gal lights, odds and ends of costumes, and throngs of
extras, seven or eight scenes sufficed to reconstruct the
Trojan War and the last days of Pompeii.
The cinema has always had this urge to jump in with
both feet, tli is eager acceptance of the unplanned, of the
impulsive, of the vulgar. It goes back to the origins, to
the first unfettered twenty years before fashion (once the
so-called Great War was out of the way) got its 1 Looks
into the 'seventh art. Before the intellectuals (starting
around 1925) launched into long, subtle analytical trea-
tises which by now would fill several gigantic and occa-
sionally fogbound freighters. You could, and still can,
become a great and respected artist through film, without
the help of university degrees or a private fortune. But
it's getting harder.
Nor is there any reason to deplore the procession of
critics tramping its way through a century extraordinarily
given to commentary and to gloss (even more so than the
sixteenth century, long held to have dominated the
field), or to regret the endless parade of books and lec-
tures, of seminars and colloquia. Obviously the cinema
could not remain a carnival attraction, forever parroting
the same vocabulary. Every inch of the short but well-
traveled road from Chaplin s slapstick antics at Keystone
to the magnificent moments of The Great Dictator or
Monsieur Verdoux had to be covered. It was done with
understandable pride, for what other century could boast
2,3
/ c a n - C l a u d e C a r r i e re
of inventing a new art form? Of placing a new mirror
before humankind? It was indeed something to wonder
at, to take pride in, to reflect on, particularly since all the
way along that short road the language of cinema has
constantly expanded, shifted, adapted to changing tastes.
An essential evolution, for forms that merely repeat
themselves quickly die of sclerosis .
So many experiences in just one century! In the his-
tory of cinema two things stand out for me: haste and
accumulation. All this jostling, this dashing hi every di-
rection, this eternally frustrated battle to organize the
flow of things, to stabilize production, to install a new
cult complete with gods and high priests, all these break-
throughs in the most unexpected countries, these group
journey mgs, these solo explorations — no doubt it all had
to happen, There is even a breed of aficionados perverse
enough to scan film track for that rare black frame over-
looked by projectionists or assistant editors* And having
isolated that one frame — the briefest of nights sand-
wiched between sunlit images — no doubt they hurry
home to gloat over their find.
No, we should regret none of it* Even though all this
haste and fury have gradually spawned the (sometimes
desperate) realization that cinema's stream flows faster
than others, that its tastes gobble one another up. that
the river we ride flows through rapids and over falls, that
classics are quickly forgotten, that innovations soon age,
that inspiration can abruptly desert us.
At the beginning of this century people wrote just
the way they write today. Jarry, Kafka, Chekhov, Proust,
Schnitzler, and so many others are our contemporaries*
Their work affects us directly, with no need for modifi-
24
cation. As for painting, it is obvious that every for
existence today had been discovered and w as on public
display by 1914,
But in the course of tins same century, the young
language of film has undergone unbelievable diversifi-
cation, and it continues to seek and explore. The emer-
gence of new images and new projection techniques, the
stubborn war waged against the fiat, the enclosed, the
framed — the imprisoning tyranny of a rectangle flattened
against a wall— everything, including commercial disap-
pointments, helps to sharpen and develop this language.
Occ a s i on a IK, as i f d e fe a tc d by th e li a rd s hips o f th e end-
less quest, some of us are tempted to stop, to say that’s
it. we re there, our vocabulary is complete, our syntax
has been perfected, About the relative size of frames,
about light densities and camera movement, we know
everything. Nothing much remains to be discovered, we
proclaim. Let us now codify once and for all w hat we
know.
This is a recurring temptation with all makers of
forms. As the 1940s drew- to a close, teachers in the early
film schools (who were themselves filmmakers) actually
measured film. “A reverse shot of a face that listens but
doesn't speak should never exceed forty-eight frames,
they would tell their students. Others, in production of-
fices, laid down commercial axioms for posterity: 'The
hero has to die at die end,” or “No film about the Middle
Ages,” or "Avoid the boxing world like the plague," or
else “Never the word death' in a title. Many agreed
that a film should uiider no circumstances last longer
than ninety minutes.
Faced with such hard-and-fast rules, filmmakers
J e a n-C l a ud e C a r r i e r e
began to wonder whether the language of cinema, by
now indistinguishable from one film to the next, was
still alive, A living language, as linguists stress, is one in
which you still make mistakes. A perfect language is
dead. It neither changes nor hesitates. It has the rigidity
of corpses, which make no mistakes.
Luckily these were gossamer rules, instantly blown
away, No manual of film grammar — aesthetic, practical,
commercial — survives longer than ten years, Everything
constantly takes itself apart and reassembles itself And
to complicate things, certain changes seem to run away
from the very people who put them into practice. For
example, the close up of a human gaze. In the early days,
when an actor looked at another actor off-camera, he
looked distinctly away from the lens. He fixed his eyes
two or three feet to the right or left as required, generally
staring at a board held up by an assistant or at some
impassive stand-in*
Little by little, more or less everywhere, that look
crept closer to the camera, The angle closed. In the
1960s the actor looked at a face stuck against the cam-
era. Jn tiie 1970s lie looked at the very edge of the appa-
ratus. Today he looks at a piece of tape stuck beside the
lens* Tomorrow he will perhaps look straight into the
camera*
Why this progressive change? 1 am not sure* Possibly
to enhance the sense of contact, to compete with the eve-
to-eye intimacy of TV announcers. Or perhaps for other
reasons which would repay intelligent study.
Permanent flux* No such thing, at the moment, as a
clear and reliable cinematic grammar*
26
T h e S e c re t L a it g u a g e of F i I m
It would therefore be pointless, and probably boring, for
me to launch into even a brief description of this lan-
guage of images, glances, sounds, movements, cries, mo-
ments of respite, charm, suffering, slow and accelerated
motion, play, braggadocio, effort, loves, secrets — of ev-
erything that {at the best of times) constitutes onr daily
activity. The list is long, indeed endless. It is by now
part and parcel of our way of thinking and feeling, the
more so since technology fosters arithmetical diversifi-
cation of this language: we know that two different actors
will play the same scene quite differently, and that two
editors, using the same filmed material but ordering it
differently, can trigger diverse and even contradictory
emotions, or give the story a whole new meaning. They
say that by selecting a mediocre actor’s finest moments, a
good editor can make him a credible candidate for acting
awards.
Not only is the language complex, since it addresses
itself to each individual spectator as well as to the audi-
ence as a whole (whose reactions can change from one
performance to the next), but everyone speaks it in his
own way, with his own tools and ideas, if possible in his
own style, with his own i imitations and idiosyncrasies*
Peter Brook often says that directing a play is an at-
tempt to make the invisible visible* The image of the
final encounter with an audience exists from the moment
work begins, in the very choice of the play. But it exists
like an uncertain shape in a fog. All the work to come
must focus on clarifying that shape, making it living and
27
/ e a n - C / a u d e C a r r i e re
palpable. Along the way, inevitably* the log will lift and
precise outlines slowly emerge. We will see what we
could not see — the way an image slowly swims into
focus in a viewfinder*
Making the invisible visible: could that be the
proper use for all language? Cinema has never traveled
alone. No one, no matter how intent on solitude, no mat-
ter how convinced that he is alone, ever journeys with-
out a companion. Intentionally or not, the cinema has
coexisted, sometimes most eagerly, with every other me-
dium . Now* in the last fifty years, the theatre has laid
great stress on the unspoken, on the subtext. We have
looked more for what happens between Chekhov's lines
than for what the lines themselves say (luckily a lot hap-
pens between Chekhov's lines). And just as nonfignra-
tive art leaves lots of room (and even at times all the
room) to the beholder's imagination, so music* seeking
vibrations lost between the notes, beyond the melody,
has discovered other* less frequented regions* In a cele-
brated remark* Sacha Guitry once said, “The concerto
von have just heard was by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. .
And the silence that followed was also by Mozart.” A
certain number of contemporary musicians say their
principal goal is to move from one silence to the next
silence Just as for Jerzy Grotowsky the art of dance is
most clearly manifest when the dancers' feet are not
touching the ground, we too have all dreamed upon the
ephemeral, the featherlight, the airborne, all the things
you say without saying and show without showing* Most
often blindly, we have stretched invisible threads be-
tween signs we found too visible, too striking, too
weighty.
28
7 ’ h e S e c ret Lang u a g e of F ilm
All this is situated inside the secret workings of time,
inside the dim recesses of our century, inside those accu-
mulated forces too somber and too dense ever to lie ana-
lyzed in the bright light of day* Science itself, at its
cutting edge, focuses more on relations among facts, and
on the almost unfathomable forces that determine them,
than on the facts themselves*
Our whole century, obdurately concrete though it
is, seems secretly obsessed with creating multiple em-
bodiments of the unseen. The cinema, naturally, has
partaken of that search. Sometimes it has even led the
way As its role required, it has shown us moving images,
but it has also shown us unsuspected affinities among
those images* By tacking two shots together it confronted
characters who in reality follow one another, thus up-
setting the normal hierarchy of objects in space (D. \V.
Griffith is credited with this find). It has shown mon-
strously enlarged human faces and even* in Un Chian
Andalou (An Andalusian Dog), a closeup of a razor slic-
ing through an eyeball (women in the audience fainted).
It has invented accents, raptures, griefs, new kinds of
terror. It may even have helped us discover hitherto un-
known feelings in ourselves*
Thus, through the ceaseless technical fever that is its
hallmark, the cinema (even though it can seem hurried,
at times even convulsive, excessive, earsplitting) has
played an irreplaceable role in the exploration of con-
nections. First because it lives exclusively on connec-
tions: among images, feelings, characters. But also
because its particular technique and language have em-
powered it to undertake extraordinary voyages of explo-
ration which, without our knowing it* have spilled over
29
Jean-Cl a u il e C cirri e re
into all neighboring forms, perhaps even into our per-
sonal conduct.
In the absence of microphones or loudspeakers,
nineteenth -century theatre was condemned to declama-
tion, Talking films brought us the murmur, the intimacy
of truly confidential exchanges, even the gasp, the heart-
beat. They exploited the human gaze with infinite deli-
cacy, and mastered the arts of silence. And from the
strange sentiments that animate the human race, they
extracted shades of meaning that traditional theatre
could never express and that literary fiction approached
differently, through the felt for no felt) echo of certain
words and certain phrases.
The cinema loves silence — and within that silence
the sound of a breath being drawn. It is expert at populat-
ing silence, at listening to it — sometimes the better to
destroy it. It can also pit two silences against one an-
other. as it did in Las Enfants du Paradis {The Children
of Paradise ), when literally indescribable emotions are
seen to Hit soundlessly across a mime s chalk- white face.
It is always a beautiful moment on a set when the
sound engineer calls for a few minutes of silence. He
will record this silence; he needs it, It will be used for
something (nobody knows quite what). This real silence
does not exist in nature. Even forest depths are alive
with rustling sounds. Silence is obtainable only in a
well-sealed studio. You turn the red light on and shut all
the doors; everything comes to a halt actors and techni-
cians freeze, stop breathing. You create silence.
Earphones clamped to his head, the sound engineer
listens to this silence, savors it gravely. You can compare
30
1 h e S ec re t Lan g u a g e f \f V i 1 m
two silences, the way painters can compare two blacks
or two whites. No two silences are the same.
Tw o or three minutes go by. No one stirs. Your mind
is a blank. And then it is over: the sound engineer is
satisfied. He thanks everyone, sounds slowly resurface,
and you move on to the next scene.
Born silent, the cinema continues to love silence. But it
can also love the ambiguity and amorphous ness of feel-
ing. In this respect it has known unbelievable change
oxer the past sixty years, from its wi Idly gesticulating
beginnings to the present inscrutability of certain screen
faces. Nowadays, simply from the demeanor or expres-
sion of particular actors, we pick up a clear message,
depending on our mood of the moment, on the day. on
the theatre we happen to be in, or on the spectators
around us. (For the African dignitaries with their closed
eves, these immediate reactions were indeed the onlv
possible guide. ) But we also glean nothing specific, noth-
ing identifiable, nothing definable. A new bend in the
road can be suddenly revealed by a glance or a shrug, a
bend of which we can say nothing, for it is something
we have no words for, and yet we sense that it contains
s om e th i n g m e an i n g fu 1 .
Occasionally, this language has ventured in direc-
tions never before explored, to the limits of the possible.
In Persona, which he made in 1966, Ingmar Bergman
shows us an actress, Liv T liman n, who abruptly ceases
to speak. Site is in the care of a nurse, Ribi A riders son,
who unlike her babbles endlessly. In a long scene
31
I e f! n - C la u d e Carrie r e
around the middle of the Kim, the nurse tells her patient
an erotic story that takes place on a beach, a story she
says she had a part in. That story lasts eight minutes; not
for a second do we leave the face, in cioseup, of the
nurse telling it. Then we move to Liv UlImaniTs face,
and the next eight minutes are taken up by exactly the
same story, word for word, and told by the same voice.
Luis Bunuel, himself fascinated by the repetition of
au action or a phrase (as can be seen in The Exterminat-
ing Angel , filmed in 1961), often spoke to me of that
apparently bold and unique scene from Persona. 3 had
the opportunity of spending time with Bergman in 1972
and I asked him — in BunutTs name and mine— the in-
evitable' question (which he had doubtless heard a hun-
dred times): ‘Why that repetition?”
He replied very simply that he had never intended
it, either while writing the screenplay or during shoot-
ing, He had meant to edit this narrative scene the way
such scenes often are edited, cutting several times from
one woman s face to the other. Them in the somber calm
of the cutting room, he realized that he did not know
where to cut, that all that back-and- forth movement in-
troduced strain, disorder, and emotional leaps. Some*
thing was not working. He therefore decided to keep
both accounts, identical as to wording, visually different,
one following the other.
He added, “The story you tell isn t the same as the
story you hear, *
Bergman also told a press conference one day how
the idea for the film Cries and Whispers came to him.
Several times, as he was thinking of something else, an
image appeared to him out of the blue. At first it was
-a
?9
U4i
T h e S e c re t La Ji g u a g e o f Fi l m
quite vague: four white shapes against a red background.
He dismissed it, but the image was persistent Again he
tried to dispel it. but it insisted, and he had to yield. lie
then saw that those four shapes were four white-clad
women in a red-lined room.
On the first, almost obsessive image that had forced
itself upon him (for without knowing it, he was looking
for a film), he set to work. He gave sharp outlines to those
fuzzy shapes, gave them faces and names, established
relationships among them — a process recalling the
vague fog-shrouded shape Peter Brook mentions. Here
it was a matter of accepting something ill-defined and
leading it toward definition, preserving along the way
(as Bergman does in his film) the equivocal moments,
the secret passages: for if given free rein, the distinct
often tends to become too clear-cut, too dry and cold and
uncompromising.
To a call of this kind, to a signal which is at first
obviously wordless, almost the fleeting beckoning of a
ghost, tile cinema must supply a form and of course a
language, as personal a language as possible. At the same
time it must remain aware that at every moment we de-
pend on everything that surrounds and holds us to-
gether. Our personal imagination stems from another
imagination, vaster and more ancient than ourselves. We
are but one knot in a rug, When the camera moves later-
ally in an inferior in films by the Japanese masters, Kenji
Mizoguchi, Akiro Kurosawa, it reproduces as if instinc-
tively the direction and pace of a worshipper visiting a
shrine.
Obscurer still: we belong to a species in which right-
handers outnumber left-handers. (A rare phenomenon,
33
J e itn-Ch t u d (: C a r r i e r e
for animals seem to make little distinction between right
and left in using their limbs.)
Whence this right-handed bias, which scientists say
makes us unique? No one really knows. Some have
sought a link in the direction of our handwriting. It is
easier for a right-hander to write from left to right
because his hand moves away from his body; a left-
hander s pen, however, moves toward his body, con-
straining him and sometimes obliging him to twist his
spine, almost to write from top to bottom, A left-hander
is fully at ease only in writing Arabic, which seems to be
made for him.
This right-handed dominance appears to be written
into some secret place within us. A French neurologist,
Francois Lhermitte, tells this story. Very simply, he
draws land going down to the sea, with the sea on the
right of the drawing. On the water he sets a sketchily
drawn ship, with nothing in the drawing to indicate
which is the vessel’s how and which its stern.
Then he asks where the ship is going, A clear major-
ity says the ship is leaving, heading out to sea.
II the drawing is turned around, with no additional
changes— the sea on the left and land on the rig] it — the
same majority will answer that the ship is about to dock,
that it is headed for the land. 111 other words, for the
majority of us the ship always moves to the right.
This habit of seeing and inserting motion where it
does not exist lias probably been a part of us without our
knowing it. It doubtless partly explains why a camera-
man’s or a director’s first impulse is to move the camera
to the right or ask an actor to w alk from left to right, as if
that were the easier and more natural path to take. (What
34
The Secret Lan gunge of Film
is more, the eyepiece is usually on the left of the camera,
which makes it more natural to push it to the right,) Mov-
ing in the opposite direction is rarer (this also holds for
the theatre). It requires an effort, a decision. It goes
against our initial impulse.
Another buried form: for three or four centuries we
have got into the habit of looking at world maps with the
north above and east to the right This habit writes into
us a geography that is quite arbitrary, since top and
bottom and right and left obviously do not exist in the
cosmps.
Despite itself, the cinema has acquired this habit. If
it needs to show a convoy heading west, it moves it from
right to left on the screen. Without realizing it, the film-
maker is echoing the map maker’s conventions. The
other way around — putting the west on the right — would
disturb our perception even though we could not say
why.
Thus, brand-new though it may be, the cinema is by
no means alone and tree. Traditional forms, stronger
than all others, slip into today's techniques* And despite
ourselves, other invisible forms which we bear within us
determine how we depict and see the world.
It is probably as hard to write a book about the cinema
as it would be to make a film about the language of litera-
ture. I cannot use pictures with sound on these pages,
and film histories illustrated with movie stills have al-
ways struck me as hybrid and illegitimate. So 1 am mak-
ing do with a handful of scattered examples in order to
tell in words what is perhaps the basic distinctive fea-
35
J e a n - C I a u d e ('■ a r r i e re
tn re, what in today’s jargon would be called the differ-
ence s of this language.
We know that in the theatre, when an actor conies
onstage magnificently costumed, every eye in the audito-
rium is momentarily fixed upon him. The play itself suf-
fers immediate adverse consequences. For a second it is
forgotten, cast aside. Contact is lost, and a path has to be
traveled all over again, A mirage, a dangerous embellish-
ment, what is known somewhat contemptuously as an
‘effect, has just marred the story that had held us, that
had seemed essential, what we had presumably come
to see.
Literary hi story is full of flamboyant flourishes of this
kind. What is “good writing”? Must the writer array him-
self at all times in fine phrases, the way some people
wear fine clothes, just to lend power and significance to
his words? Or must he (as Stendhal recommended) ex-
press himself with the dispassionate objectivity of the
penal code? A few writers, alive to the twin dangers of
platitude on the one hand and superfluity on the other,
shuttle constantly between the two temptations (like
Flaubert fleeing the flamboyance of Salammho for the
dry brevity of Bouvard and Pecuchet). Such writers
never lose their mistrust of the arrogance, pointlessness,
and self-indulgence of a distinctive style. But this phe-
nomenon of style, this obsession with "writing well,” in
other words with not writing like everyone else, with
setting your own stamp on words — how do we get rid oi
it? Is it not truly a part of ourselves? How to attain abso-
lute objectivity?
People believed for a time that cine mas 'mechani-
cal eye could more easily dissolve this literary mirage
36
The Secret Language of Film
— -that you had only to set sip a camera on a street and let
it film passer. shy to produce a sort of cinematic statement,
of cinema-verite , But what about the frame, closing off
its own square of street ? What about the motionless lens,
and time, which relegates to the past all things filmed?
What about our beholding eye, our choice of this particu-
lar street? Where is the truth? And which truth?
Even in fictional cinema many directors have at-
tempted to efface their style, make it everyday and con-
ventional, so as to let the film act and speak for itself.
Wild camera movements, unusual angles, visual fantasy,
distorted sound effects— all seem comparable to the
actor's ostentatious costume, Jean-Luc Godard used to
say that to make a good film you should never use a zoom
lens. Together with a few friends, 1 too drew up a table
of surefire indicators of a bad film. For example, L Any
film which shows someone hit by machine-gun fire and
dying hi slow motion is a bad film, Use of such a device,
with its mindless determination to (as [ heard someone
put it) "get the greatest possible mileage out of death?
struck us, and still strikes me, as vulgar and obscene.
Slow motion (or in other cases accelerated motion)
seemed to mark a film as belonging to the horrible and
hellish category of movies not to be seen.
Among other stigmata were every kind of gelatinous
deformation of the image, particularly the artistically
out-of-focus shot; the pair of lovers running to meet in
slow motion, arms eagerly outstretched; any scene in
which a character puts on clown makeup (unbearably
hackneyed); any picture of gulls over the sea (particu-
larly at sunset); and all such cliche horrors.
Such in flexibility did not last. In his later films
37
Jean- C fan de Carr i e re
Godard himself, Lifter working several years with video,
became a prolific user of all the latest technical proce-
dures. Fortunately, no rule ever endures!
Yet the instant an effect materializes, we run the risk
of seeing technique and only technique* When the cam-
era takes over the screen we feel it at once; we realize
suddenly that we are in a movie house — not in the heart
of the story we have come to see* This violation is partic-
ularly obvious and disturbing in period films. A striking
cinematic effect in such a film, set for example in the
sixteenth century, has an incongruity which breaks the
thread and kills our interest.
I remember how carefully Daniel Yigne set up his
camera in The Return of Martin Guerre , selecting height
oi viewpoint, keeping movements imperceptible and al-
ways linked to the movement of a given character. Maxi-
mum discretion, as if he were apologizing for this
intrusion of present-day impedimenta among peasants in
sixteenth-century dress. Anyone who has ever attempted
to reconstruct the past with maximum fidelity has en-
countered the same problems and adopted the same
kinds of solutions.
Unless you make this irruption, this hiatus, the very
heart of the film. Unless the lens’ s intrusion into the
Middle Ages is your real theme, Unless the director
chooses to cloak a body he knows to be sickly in a fine
garment. Unless . . .
Options that Lire forever open, in the cinema as else-
where. Every language tends to branch out, to adorn it-
self, to preen, or else with a kind of reverse coquetry
to wallow in street vernacular. Every language tends to
expand and conquer, to be satisfied in the final analysis
38
T he $ e c re i L a n g u a g e o f F i l m
with itself alone, and often to speak for the sake of speak-
ing. In a way, the Surrealists even sought this autonomy,
this omnipotence; they both aspired to and practiced
writing in an automatic mode. They believed that words,
acting in un mediated contact with ourselves and freed
from the mind's control, express things we are too para-
lyzed by our cultural habits to see or feel any more.
The cinema too has undergone the temptation of au-
tomatic filming/ 5 of the strolling camera. (For that matter
it has flirted with every great artistic temptation since
the 1920s, with results generally short-lived.) The tech-
niques that gave it life had clear, built-in hunts. They
became and s ti 1 1 are a cm ist rain t . F i 1 m ea mini cscapt its
destiny: it can never he anything but a sequ \J /Tstill
photographs stitched together by our ey< iitn>
duces motion into this sequence of motioi ;ii[ \ Th
movies are exactly that — i 1 i ovi ng pi chin Wi th i r n de
fined and usually selected frame a film has to show some-
thing identifiable. And since production methods are
long and sequential, the film never escapes the mind’s
control .
Although Runnel had been fascinated since his
youth by special effects (even around 1970 J recall his
genuine wonder on discovering the special- effects possi-
bilities of video during a Saturday night TV broadcast),
he systematically rejected overelaborate or overwhelm-
ing shots. He liked them in Fellini, hut refused them in
his own films. He sought a neutral, almost boring image,
at the outer limits of banality. Example: for the end of
Nazar In his Mexican head cameraman, Gabriel Figue-
roa, prepared a splendid frame for him, with high moun-
tains in the distance, cacti in the foreground, and fleecy
39
I eau-CI a u d e C a r r i e re
clouds in a vast sky. Without even looking in the view-
finder, Buriuel brutally swung the camera around to face
in the opposite direction, forcing the whole crew to
scramble into new positions, and filmed Francisco Rabal
moving away across plowed fields that might have been
anywhere.
■*
Bu.nu el did not want mystery to emanate from a well-
contrived chiaroscuro; from the timely creaking of a
door, from blurring, from slow motion, lie thoroughly
distrusted every kind of cinematographic effect, re-
jecting it as facile, arty. He sought what was unseen
rather than what was obscure. He was wary of beauty.
Yet rather than seeking (for example) a repetitive formal-
ism on the fines of Yasujiro Ozu’s fixed frames and low-
angle* camera, he saw a mysterious hypnotic power in
the trembling of the frame's borders, in the almost im-
perceptible movement of the camera, like the wavering
head of a snake seeking prey.
This concern to suppress technique in favor of some-
thing more subtle, this deliberate avoidance of effect,
this distrust of ever-seductive beauty seems singularly
dangerous. In film, virtuosity is highly reassuring, winch
is why it so often attracts beginners. Rejecting virtuosity
implies that you are sure of the power of what you are
showing.
In the 1950s we had a conventional, technically
flawless cinema which it suited us to call traditional, but
which very soon seemed to be repeating itself . The same
designers worked with the same head cameramen and
the same editors, so that judging only by directorial style
it was often impossible to tell one film from another.
People even w orried that the language of cinema— indis-
40
1 ‘ h e S e c re t Languag e of Film
tinguishable from film to film — might have given up the
ghost.
In those days the director was just one worker among
many. Although he was often the one who had chosen
the subject of the film, he concerned him self with little
beyond directing the actors and supervising the work
schedule- Sometimes, for example in the American pro-
duction system of the 1930s and 1940s (which, being
a strictly industrial vision, is still verv much alive and
kicking), even the screenplay and the editing were out
of his hands. The producer, absolute master of the film,
took the footage from him at the end of every day for
editing elsewhere, Often the director was nothing but
a privileged employee, hopping from one production
to the next; The better organized wrapped up one film
on Saturday evening and began another on Monday
morning.
Today, when a conscientious director spends at least
two years of his life on each of his films, and sometimes
fo u r o r fi v e i o fte n enough, lie is his o wn pro d u c e r ) , s uc h
practices seem out of the question, except for television
series. But in the latter ease the director is scarcely more
than a faceless technician. During the 1986 Venice Festi-
val, the German director Peter Fleisehmann asked an
audience of two or three hundred film people;
"Who is the director of ‘Dallas?”
No one could tell him.
There have been upheavals in the brief and tumultu-
ous history of the cinema; the French New Wave, at the
end of the 1959s, rose in determined revolt against this
systematic anonymity, against this surface similarity
among films distinguished by nothing except perhaps
41
I e a n-Cla u d e C a r r i e re
their actors and the story they told. One of its cherished
aims was for directors to stop concealing their personali-
ties behind assembly-line technique. Its advocates really
spoke of “language/’ of the camera-stylo, or camera-as-
writing-instrument, of the author s film. Film language
— common to everyone and peculiar to each individual,
like all language — reappeared on the agenda, for the
greater good of film. It emerged from the shadows: you
began to see it on the screen, you followed its progress,
its maturing, its repetitions, its aberrations, sometimes
its disasters.
Fairly soon — for nothing stays fresh and, as the In-
dian proverb says, "Cod is always concerned with begin-
nings” — this notion of the author's film was perverted,
and the language suffered in consequence. From the
splendid declaration we all applauded— "a film must
bear the mark of its direc tor ” — the formula in fairly short
order entered its decadent phase and became more or
less “an authors film is one in which a director talks
about himself. Between the two approaches the gap is
narrow, the difference barely palpable. Yet it is complete
and it is most often unbridgeable. Slide into the self-
indulgence of the second definition, and the great door
at once swings open to reveal the endless fevered imag-
inings that swamped us in the 1970s. This was especially
the case in France where so many voice-overs — usually
monotonous — droned in slow accompaniment to anemic
i n i age s . E ve r y one w anted to “ex; p r e s s ' his fa n ta s i e s , h i s
memories, even his personal thoughts. Everyone felt
theoretically entitled to do so, and was later painfully
surprised to see his work enjoy at most two or three days'
screening in a small, empty theatre.
42
77t e S e ere t L a n guag e o f F i I m
Yet again, in just a few years an idea had been Inst.
It had slipped from the initial rigor of an exacting theory,
which great filmmakers instinctively applied, to the ba-
nality of daily (and rote) implementation.
The trend today, for a thousand appropriate reasons,
is toward a return — itself dangerous— to a screen writers
cinema. Here content would outweigh form: the film
would be made only to illustrate the screenplay, not the
screenplay to allow the film to come to life. I will return
later to the difficult role of the screenwriter, always
caught between conflicting demands. But let us say that
since the 1980s the screenwriter has held the place of
honor, of too much honor. All over the world conferences
are dedicated to the theme (in my view impossibly re-
fractory) of the screenplay. In particular, who knows
why, a thousand seminars bloom on the topic of the
adaptation. Hence the danger: a return to the literary, a
weakening of the image in favor of words. Images con-
stantly falling into the pitfall of the tried-and-true, of the
run-of-the-mill. The end of striving, of experimenting,
But this is doubtless just a swing of the pendulum,
induced by commercial uncertainties, A swing which I
hope will shortly be reversed.
We saw s om et h ing si m i 1 ar h appei t Hit brute c
States when the talkies took over. Sudden \\i 1 1 k •
films spoke, the heads of the major comj iu^edecidrd
to call on the masters of the written w ord, t 3c w ords
on great writers. They summoned Faulkner J itzgcmH,
Steinbeck, and others. They offered them houses, of-
fices, secretaries, and salaries, and put them to work on
what was rather naively assumed to be their domain,
words. Amid conflicts, blunders, and much ill-feeling, a
43
Jean- C l a u d e C a r r i e re
long-lived misapprehension arose and endures- It some-
times produced excellent results (the collaboration of
William Faulkner and Howard Hawks, for example), as
well as remarkable disasters. Some historians even speak
of a simultaneous decline in the language of film, as if
profligate and sometimes excessive use of dialogue in-
cline d d * re c t< > rs to laziness and did away w i th th e ne e d
for powerful, compact, radiant, and emblematic frames,
each one of which — in great silent films from Fritz Lang
to Buster Keaton — had a few years earlier seemed to con-
tain the whole film.
Moreover these universal images, once readily un-
derstood all over the world, were now displaced by a
spoken language that led back to the particular, to the
parochial, that now had to be dubbed or subtitled in
order to be universally understood.
According to one reporter, William Faulkner, hired
to write the screenplay for The Land of the Pharaohs,
which Howard Hawks was to direct, put off the writing
as long as possible. Months went by, Alexandre
Trauner s set went up, but not a line was written.
One day Faulkner announced that he had started
work. The producer arrived, found the writer splitting
his sides with laughter, and asked the reason for his
mirth. Faulkner showed him the first line of dialogue.
The Pharaoh, visiting the building site, had asked his
workers :
-How’s it going, boys?”
This simple English phrase he had put in the Pha-
raoh s mouth kept Faulkner laughing uncontrollably for
hours. But later he did finish the screenplay.
44
7 he S e c re t La n guag e o j Fit m
And then, like all fashions, the fashion for great
writers passed.
Out century has witnessed the invention of a lan-
guage and daily observes its metamorphosis, Seeing a
language come to life, a true language able to sa> any-
thing, and participating, even if only as a spectator, in
that ongoing process of discovery, strikes me as a unique
phenomenon that should excite semiologists, psycholo-
gists, sociologists, and anthropologists. But perhaps that
language has grown too familiar to us — too little noticed ,
even — to continue to hold our interest. It has taken only
four generations of filmgoers for the language to write
itself into our cultural memory, into our reflexes, perhaps
even into our genes, The sequences of moving pictures
that enfold and submerge us are today so numerous and
so interlinked that they could be said to constitute what
Milan Kundera calls a ' semantic river/ In it we and
our peers swim effortlessly, buoyed by familiar currents.
Only at times of ferocious pollution are we seized with
the brutal urge to stem a flow in which facility is drown-
ing us, with the need to cut loose, bind a handkerchief
over our eyes, see and hear no more. For a language is
also something we can decide to stop understanding;
something to refuse, to reject.
Fellini once said that television had spawned a new
generation of spectators he found arrogant, overbearing,
neurotically impatient The ability to switch channels at
all times, which kills a narrative, to keep on moving
ahead to something else (t lie idea that images I am not
seeing are being shown elsewhere is intolerable), has
created fireworks displays that spurt from our own fin-
75
Jvu n -Cl a u d e C a r r / e r e
gertips. The magic remote control gives us the illusion
that these images belong to us, that we have total power
over them, that without us they would not be. They are
simply images chasing after other images, with no hope
of gulping them down. This impatience, said Fellini,
could never be satisfied or sated, for we cannot fix our
eyes cm an image without first eliminating the picture we
had been looking at, just as we cannot utter two words
simultaneously. It is a vain, futile pursuit, giving birth to
fatigue and depression. The spectator himself is de-
stroyed by his own fevered role. The sequence of images
cut mot resist him. It blows to pieces in his hands. And
he founders along with it.
Whether you speak it or are at the receiving end, you
must obv iously remain in control of any language. To be
able to love the cinema fully, you must be able to do
without images, without cinema. It is a question of inde-
pendence. f ust as the millers of old heard their mill
wheels only when they stopped turning, so we can prop-
erly observe the images around us only as long as we
retain the strength to extinguish them.
46
REALITY
IN FLIGHT
I n 1974, the Algerian director Ahmed Rachedi was
shooting a film in the mountains of Kahylia, in
northern Algeria, For one small part he hired an old
woman who spoke only Kabyle and knew little about the
cinema.
A young Algerian actor played the part of this
woman’s son. As required by the script, he was killed by
a burst of gunfire in one scene and his body was carried
away. On the director’s instructions, the old woman wept
and showed her grief as well as she was able. Her pain
seemed very real.
Next morning, for various technical reasons, they had
to shoot the same* scene again. Ahmed Rachedi quickly
explained the situation to the old woman, asking her to
do exactly as before* '‘We’re going to kill your son all
./ e a n-Cl a a d e Car r i e re
over again/ lie told her. 'Tern just cry the way von did
yesterday/ ’
But the woman did not understand. For her, the
young actor playing her son had died the day before.
With her own eyes she had seen red blood spurt from
the little plastic packets which you conceal in clothing
and which explode on command. She had seen the
young man fall and his body carried away. She had not
seen him again that night. For her lie was — like other
victims in the few films she had seen — -dead beyond the
shadow of a doubt. In cinema, a highly magical and dan-
gerous activity, people really were killed. The actor had
to be brought to her, she had to see him and touch him,
before she agreed to reenact the scene of her grief
But she remained deeply disturbed. In another
scene, answering a French policeman who exasperat-
ed 1 y asked her, “But don’t you understand Arabic?” she
was supposed to give some reply or other, still concern-
ing her son. Instead of saying the lines that had been
taught her, she answered the other actor with a simple
no. The director stopped si looting, explained to her that
she had to “act/' to say what was asked of her. She re-
fused to budge, and since site really did speak nothing
but Kahyle, stubbornly went on answering no to the
question ‘But don't you understand Arabic?”
She added (in Kahyle), 1 Tm not going to start lying at
my age/
The history of the cinema is studded with such sto-
ries, an endless source of wonder to the film workers
who pass them around. The Kahyle woman considered
her line a lie (and from her standpoint she was right)
because of the cinema’s mysterious and compelling
48
77i e S e c ret L a n gang e o f F i ! m
power to convince* It has possessed this power since
its beginnings (and to a greater degree than any other
medium), ever since the Lumiere Brothers’ first Parisian
spectators recoiled in alarm at the train hurtling silently
down on them.
Here, what is invisible is unreality itself. What the
audience does not see is the subterfuge. The fiction, the
very nature of film, shooting and projection techniques
— everything is forgotten, swept away by the physical
power of the talking image, that noisy mask slipped over
reality's countenance. Women jump, scream, and hide
their faces when a snake suddenly crosses the screen
— women and some men, too. Vampires terrify, spires
induce vertigo, pornographic movies embarrass the
prudish, I even knew an asthmatic who choked when
actors smoked on-screen. The cinema has exploited this
singular power more or less cal ciliated I y since its adven-
ture first began, since Georges Melies, not content with
inflating human heads or reproducing himself many
times over on-screen, actually reconstructed current
events, such as the coronation of the king oi England, in
his studio at Montreuil-sous-Bois.
Of course such tongue-in-cheek “staging” of contem-
porary history, which seems somewhat barefaced to us,
descended directly from popular theatrical tradition. But
Melies did more than just fabricate settings. He was al-
ready laying false trails, playing with the new ambiguity.
With the merest of hints at the brazenness of his decep-
tions, he led his audiences on, already aware of the al-
most inexplicable power of persuasion his moving
images possessed.
It was and is a power that sometimes escapes us, that
49
/ e a n -Clau d e C a rr i c re
can let us down just when we count on it. It is a shifting,
inconsistent kind of power, often stronger, oddly
enough, in the excesses of fiction than in the supposedly
objective honesty of the documentary — as if ‘ real real-
ity were harder to convey than the artificial kind. Indeed,
certain famous documentaries in die perverse Melies tra-
dition (such as Luis Buhners Las Hurdes) are pure fake,
wholly reconstructed and staged, as their authors them-
selves admit. In such cases subterfuge comes to the res-
cue of faltering (or at least dull or mediocre) reality,
giving it the treacherous allure we too readily accept as
the “truth." And thus a new chapter opens in the age-old
history of the lie.
Thc i tools of persuasion can seem simple; emotion, a
physical sense of fear, repulsion, irritation, anger, dis-
tress, But in fact the operation is much more complex,
indeed probably beyond definition. It engages the most
secret mechanisms of our brain, including perhaps the
brain's laziness, its natural indolence, its willingness to
surrender its virtue to any smooth talker. And it asks
questions (which like all real questions are unanswer-
able) about the relationship of reality to truth, (Always
supposing that those two words, their meaning blunted
by long usage, can be linked to the tendency to which
we all succumb; our disturbing failure to resist the im-
ages put before us, our inability to think for ourselves, to
react intelligently and skeptically.) Perhaps there are
even grounds for fearing, as some claim, that this per-
verse taste for illusion, this desperate wish to be con-
vinced, may be the mark of fundamental human
duplicity.
50
The Secret Language of Tihn
He He *
In the 1970s, still in Algeria, filmmakers and doctors
made an educational documentary about an eye disease
widespread in one of the country's central provinces.
Traveling crews then went out to show the film and orga-
nize discussions in the villages. The disease, a form oi
trachoma, is caused by a fly, which was shown in eloseup
several times on the screen.
After the showing the villagers announced that the
film did not concern them. They even seemed surprised
that they had been asked to view it.
'But almost every one of you has trachoma!’ a doctor
said to them.
“Yes, but we don't have flies that size here/’
In this case it was the very idea of closeups, the tech-
nical concept of lens and visual proportion, that was
called into question. Cinematographic language was not
perceived as a language, as a conventional vocabulary,
and the Algerian mountain people simply saw an enor-
mous fly. Their intelligence and common sense rejected
the whole thing. No, they knew of no flies of this size.
They were in much the same position as ourselves when
we look at the sky. II we did not know it was the other
way about, if we had not been taught it, we would clearly
and unarguable see that the sun moves around the earth
and is markedlv smaller.
■>
Li ice wise with those Algerian villagers* They had not
seen the film, they had seen the fly.
In the 1960s, the French ethnologist-director Jean
Roueh shot a film about hippopotamus hunting. Me did
5 /
/ e an -Cl a u de C a r r i e re
it with the people of a village located near the Niger
River, During the shooting he recorded music in the
hunters' village. He then moved to Dakar to edit the
film, incorporating this music into the soundtrack.
When the film was finished a few months later, he
went back to the village to show it to the inhabitants. It
was tile occasion for a great all-night celebration. The
villagers, who asked to be shown the film six times run-
ning, proclaimed themselves delighted. They had no
trouble recognizing themselves and families and friends
on screen, and even expressed grief at sight of those who
had since died*
No problem arose to rival that of the fly eloseup. The
film, as a film, met with perfect acceptance. And yet, as
dawn approached, one or two of them added a comment
to the warm compliments they paid Jean Rouch: the
music was wrong, quite wrong.
Surprised, Rouch said, 'But it’s your own music! I
recorded it right here!
' Oh yes,” the Africans replied, "We recognized it.
But i! you played it that way when you went hunting,
the hippopotamus would take off in a hurry!
The whole notion of musical accompaniment was
challenged, Jean Rouch tells the story with a smile; he
sees it as an object lesson, If you want to be real, you
have to be real all the way. Every cultural habit can hide
an underlying falsehood. How often do we watch a TV
broadcast on Lebanon (or any other cursed or war-
ravaged place) without noticing that the producer, to
flesh out” or "strengthen” his pictures, has almost sur-
reptitiously' slipped in a musical accompaniment, a few
bars of Wagner or Erik Satie or the Talking Heads, Such
59
The- Secret Language oj Film
a procedure is out-and-out falsification: il we were hip*
popotarnuses we would flee indeed! But most of us do
not even notice. We are used to it.
All kinds of alien music surreptitiously invade im-
ages we believe to be real, true to life. In the constant
shuttling from ourselves to the ' ri al ' and back again, the
pitfalls are many and hidden, whether it's the eloseup
of a fly* a musical accompaniment, or any other kind of
technical enhancement. In these particular cases our
eyes and ears, conditioned for almost a century, are tie-
sensitized and virtually disabled. We believe we are
truly seeing and hearing, but parasites invade us, intrud-
ers seduce us, and without knowing it we are duped.
Our mesmerized intelligence shrinks and is paralyzed,
yielding to emotion and even sensation, for we some-
times receive the strong physical impression- — as in the
case of the snake that makes the women swoon— that
film, that fine blank membrane on which images settle
and move, can touch us directly, that this reptile will
slither under every skirt in the auditorium. Our eyes see
what is not there, our cars fail to hear what is there; the
sun goes on circling the earth; in the end we find our
pleasure in illusion.
Antonin Artaud wrote: “Cinema plays first of all on the
human kin of things, on the epidermis of reality/'
Contact between two skins. Relief through touch.
Every film goer is in his own way a little Doubting
Thomas, believing only what he sees, and seeing what
he believes he sees. He is hardly ever able to pursue the
image outside the screen, to stretch it out, to distort it
53
/ e a n - C I a a d c C a r r i c re
'It the trick is convincingly performed/' there is no es-
caping it We consent, often happily, to he fooled.
What is the source of this power, which can so often
become hypnotic, even hallucinatory?
Photography, no doubt. That is what we are first
tempted to reply. The photographic process. Every film
is a succession of photographic reproductions, and a
photo (whatever you do with it) is always something that
has had an existence, that has at some specific point been
real. Indeed, the photo is proof (sometimes most tena-
cious proof) of that existence. In fact, it can be the only
proof — witness the efforts of certain regimes to distort
the history of the century by banishing non persons
from the photographic record. (Which can he dangerous,
for the very fact of wanting to eliminate them often en-
hances the importance of such ghosts.)
Every film in its own way manufactures past time;
and as we all know, the past is the only unarguable real-
ity, the one that leaves a trail, that can be told and even
taught. Films (in which tinkering is trickier than in still
photos) will obviously he useful to the historians and
archeologists, perhaps even the paleontologists, who
w in one day mull over twentieth -century events. For
historians, this is already the case. Filmed news over-
flows with images of our time, from war to daily life,
sports to accidents, celebrities' lives to disasters. The
images are often cropped, manipulated, subtly disfig-
ured by editing or commentary or music (Beirut with
“backing” by Wagner). The images can carry a propa-
ganda message, for example, footage of very young Ger-
mans departing to their deaths in 1945, full of warrior
zeal. Here reality is wholly misrepresented by staging.
54
T h e S e c re t L a n gu a ge of F ilni
You c hoose the actors (blond, beautiful), you dress them
carefully* you ask them to smile at the right moment, just
as they march past the camera, you choose a sunny day
to shoot (you even boost the sun with artificial lighting).
Everything is calculated to make the lie seem true. The
march to massacre is a joyful affair.
We are prone to all these distortions, even in peace-
time, even dealing with apparently trivial, dull, ordinary
events. The network of images that surrounds us is so
dense and at times so intricately woven that it is almost
impossible not to give way to a kind of mental indolence,
an intellectual somnolence which allows the invasion
of lies — just as, in days gone by, drunken or exhausted
sentinels in beleaguered cities dozed off and let the
enemy in. The “truth of a photo, or of a newsreel, or
of any kind ol reporting, is obviously quite relative, for
we see only what the camera sees, we hear only what we
are told. Wo do not see what someone has leritk I wt
should not se
not see. And
want to see.
One of the latest fashionable tricks — it started in the
United States, but there is every reason to believe it is
already practiced elsewhere as well — is manufacturing
false news reports, filming fake news. We were unable
to film this or that historic scene? No problem: well
reconstruct it, using actors.
It can be done by inserting new images, interleafing
them with real-life ones (a well-known editing trick
oiten used to comic effect), or else by purely and simply
reconstructing a news item. In July 1989, for instance,
during the Felix Bloch spy ease, ABC broadcast — -as
e, or what the creators of thest i l . > did
above all, we do not see what \\v H^-not
55
Iran- C I a u de C a r r i e re
"irrefutable proof*- — a scene in which Bloch hands a
Soviet agent a briefcase. It was a fake, entirely stage-
managed, filmed hi realistic conditions.
American law requires that the word dramatization
appear on-screen at such a point. But this warning can
appear so often and so fleeting! y that few viewers take
notice. Indeed, it is a kind of screen-infesting virus that
must sooner or later he driven away, The 'America s
Most Wanted" series plays skillfully on this confusion.
The added-on scenes are so cleverly shot that a certain
number of viewers will inevitably be deceived. One
actor appearing in the series was arrested and handed
over to the police by a viewer who assumed he was the
criminal in person.
Here we are close to nine tee nth -century melodrama,
when audiences are said to have waited at the stage door
to give the villain a thrashing. Close also to Melies, who
was the first to put fiction and real life in the same bag.
Simultaneously, in television programming the
world over, reality (or fabricated reality) is making a
spectacular comeback in the form of 'simulations. Here
the two sides of the looking-glass meet and are blurred.
Men and women who have suffered some mishap are
asked to recreate the episode in question for the cam-
eras. They thus become actors in their own story, which
they present to us with all the paraphernalia of fakery
and stagesetting. Stray characters drifting in from real
life thus get caught in the cunningly woven net of fiction
and lose their reality. Nothing is false, yet nothing is
true.
No doubt a limitless future awaits this blurring of the
truth, these halftone lies. What marvels of ingenuity lie
56
Th c .S e c re t La ng u a g c o f F i I m
ahead — careers for simulation specialists, perhaps, de-
mented court cases at which only false testimony (all of
it "real,” in other words filmed) would be heard, or even
TV games along the lines of: what is false in the histori-
cal scenes we are about to show you?
To these dubious methods can be added die tech-
niques of so-called virtual or synthetic images — images
which no longer depict reality but are a mathematical
construct, born of a concept. This blurring of the truth
can only get worse.
In the process our history, our memory, our everyday
life, our relationship with things will lose all sharpness
(if indeed everything in so-called real life is clear and
sharp).
Examples abound, not of flagrant lying, as in the Bloch
case, but of barely perceptible distortion, A TV news
program broadcasts a brief report on a political rally at
election time. The creators of the report must first isolate
the words they intend to use from speeches made at the
rally. This first choice is significant, for it inevitably
loads the scales one way or another, the more so because
speakers do not express themselves in public the way
they would in a TV interview. Carried by the emotion of
crowds that already share their views, they let them-
selves go; they wax eloquent and even bombastic. They
raise their voices, wave their arms — hustings theatrics
that are sure to look exaggerated and often ridiculous on
the small screen, for television is an exercise in intimacy.
All politicians are familiar with this double standard gov-
erning their public utterances, but very few master it
57
I 1 -: a n - C ! a u cl e C 1 a rr i e re
And there is something subtler, more hidden. For
the same political meeting the report will show a few
frames, as tradition requires, of the listening audience.
If the shots are of young, beautiful, eager-eyed, passion-
ately applauding women (some political groups hire
carefully selected walk-ons), the impression will be fa-
vorable, If, however, the spectators are dul 1-looking, or
spectacularly ugly, the kind you see at every meeting, it
will be bad news for the politician; a shadow will darken
the report of the rally.
An alert spectator can tell from the producer’s
choices whether he is for or against the political party he
is covering on a particular day. Yet to all appearances the
producer has simply done his job. He has not distorted
reality, lie lias selected fragments of it.
As in cinema.
Sometimes it is enough to be forewarned, to have a
lucid grasp of the language of film, for every TV 7 news
program to become an interesting decoding exercise. We
can then look with new eyes at the images that bombard
us (nobody ever wholly escapes them), anticipating
blind alleys, technical tricks, omissions. Our habitual
passivity can give way to wake fulness, to curiosity, to a
critical eye. A necessary, salutary attitude and— doubt-
less for that very reason — a perpetually threatened one.
But how many people will take the trouble, or are
informed enough, to open their eyes, to see differently?
Most of the time we stare supine and dullwitted at the
image we are shown and the sound we are made to hear;
dull and unre acting. Sometimes we hear that these are
“exclusive'" pictures — meaning that they have been ac-
quired as a result of sub rosa deals and fees higher than
58
7 ’ h e S e c re t Lang nag e o f F i I n i
the competition could afford. We are being tempted with
promises of horrors.
After one railroad disaster J even heard a reporter
say, “With 1 uck, we will be able to show you footage of
this horrible accident later on in the program.’
An unhappy choice of words, no doubt* Every profes-
sional announcer is to some degree an actor. His face
tells us at once whether the day s news will be funereal
or jolly. He can hardly smile while reporting an assassi-
nation, an oil spill, or the defeat of the national team. For
years now, the news has been a show, and the chief
aim is basically entertainment. The last thing a network
wants is for viewers to hunt for better news on some
other channel.
Worse still, we know that in all wars, above all during
street battles in cities, combatants are stimulated by the
camera's presence. They will readily offer to go to the
corner and loose off a burst of live ammunition for a
reporter. So even some of these pictures are takes,
Volker Schlondorff reports that in Beirut, while shooting
Die Fdlschung (Circle of Deceit), soldiers he had hired
as extras offered to fire from a window and kill— at
random— some passers by out in the street.
So the realistic power of motion photography can Ire de-
ceptive, W ill our descendants, even the most vigilant of
them, always be able to tell genuine “live news pic-
tures from organized deception of the kind that charac-
terizes propaganda films, from ‘simulations’ 1 in which
actors and real -life characters are often clumsily con-
fused, from blockbuster shows built up around a real
59
J ea n -C l a u de Carrie re
event (like the Gulf War) which can strip it of all reality*
or from unabashed studio reconstructions like those of
Georges Melies or of new -style “telejournalism ’?
It is far from certai n. This blurring of genres, already
a staple of TV news programs, seems likely to insinuate
itself soon enough into history proper. We already have
programs calling themselves historical and making
lavish use of “historical films to illustrate the events
they record. We are shown scenes from antiquity or the
Middle Ages as if they were live' news footage. We see
Napoleon with Marlon Brando’s profile, Joan of Arc with
Ingrid Bergman’s face and broad shoulders (and of
course both speak English), Why not, after all? News
reporting is regularly distorted and dishonest, so why
not summon fiction to the rescue? If the film's labor of
reconstruction is well done, avoiding known pitfalls
(such as the gleam of stirrups in Bible stories or visible
stocking seams on Pharaoh s daughters), the resulting
visualization of history can not only tie charming but can
help us — via attitudes, play, actions, and even sounds —
draw closer to the past. If we want to know exactly what
a medieval peasant was thinking as he plowed the land,
and how hard it was, it is sometimes enough to put a
period implement into an actor's hands and ask him to
perform the task. The implement dictates his posture
and molds his movements. By gripping it and attacking
the soil, he is already traveling in time.
What is valid for one man is just as valid for a group.
To show us a great pyramid under construction in Land
of the Pharaohs, set designer Alexandre Trauner had to
tackle problems comparable to those confronting ancient
60
7 h e S e c re t L a n guag e o f F i I m
Egyptian builders. We should acknowledge his effort,
his concern for the truth,
And then there are the films that straightforwardly
reveal the lives of Abraham Lincoln, Gandhi, or Stalin,
or above all Chaplin; in other words, people close
enough to us for an accurate iconography, even photos
and film footage, to be available.
Here fiction gets ambitious, A carefully made-up
actor incarnates the great figure (there have been a good
hundred Hitlers already, and the game has barely
begun), the whole aim apparently being for the original
and the replica to be interchangeable in a century or two.
With Stalin, thanks to Soviet makeup artistry, telling the
difference is already tricky. What will it be for our grand-
children?
It s the inevitable triumph of historical fiction.
Like it or not, accept it or not, our vision of the past
and perhaps even our sense of history now flow chiefly
through film, There is no escaping it. Cinematic images
write themselves into us without our knowledge, like
masks placed over past centuries. Little by little they
replace the older official versions — the great battle pan-
oramas, official portraits of monarchs and dignitaries, cel-
ebrated scenes, the long procession of lofty lies that once
helped form our notions of history.
So one lie replaces another.
Today we are sc overloaded with images of the past
(true, half-true, or false) that the forest is lost for the
trees, and some of film s technical shortcomings have a
heavy impact on our basic perception of history. The
absence of smell, for example. H istorians all tell us, with
61
J e a n-C J a u d e C a rr i e re
great conviction, that the past stank, in the cities at any
rate. In fact it stank most foully. But these foul smells —
sweat, excrement fetid air, decomposition — are almost
impossible for us to imagine, to feel. Film, like an invisi-
ble screen between reality and ourselves, has vetoed it.
Film has sweetened history, sanitized and dry-cleaned
it, and all because of a simple technical deficiency.
And what producer would dare sell audiences tickets
to a smelly auditorium?
Photography’s power to convince is enhanced, as has
often been pointed out, by the physical conditions —
silence and darkness — in which films are shown. Specta-
tors are away from their homes in strange surroundings,
among unknown neighbors they will probably never
see again. Like the chained men in Plato’s cave, who
see moving shadows and take them for reality, they
too see pictures they call real as they sit motionless in
the dark.
Seduced yet again (and astonished as well, for we
vaguely re member that all this was made possible by
our own technical ingenuity), our mind seeks only to
surrender, to he duped, bluffed. Doubting Thomas
again. We see, therefore we believe.
Some scientists insist that seeing is separating. No
vision of totality is conceivable. To see, to be sure of
seeing, you must differentiate the object beheld from all
that surrounds and interferes with it. From the scientific
standpoint, seeing is a technique and a subterfuge. All
vision is relative and necessarily incomplete, since our
eyes evolved in response to the light of the sun and thus
62
T h e S e ere t L a n g u a g e o f F ilm
can see only images born of the sun. The atom of the sun
speaks the language of light to the atom of the eye. And
our eye sees nothing else; it sees neither infrared nor
ultraviolet rays nor several other kinds of cosmic rays. If
we wish to see those, we must make ourselves other
eyes.
Film is of course the arch -separator. The borders ol
the screen are geometrically drawn, clean-cut All
around them is shadow. There is what is on the screen
— a bombardment of organized photons — and what is not
on the screen — the blurred, the dark, the undiscerned,
the invisible. And even within that luminous squared-
off space, only the sharp images arc visible, those that
are in focus; all the others are hazy, and our eye simply
passes over them.
Thus, within this cordoned-oif space, on the screen
itself, technology can introduce an added separation by
playing light against shade, sharp against hazy. The cen-
ter of the square is where the invisible finger is pointing.
Look only at what I choose to show you.
! ime also separates* For the duration of the film, it
briefly isolates a group of people from the rest of the
world. As if, escaping life's turbulence for the space of
two hours, the audience could forget time, could stop
growing old. The modern cave shelters us from the old-
est of evils.
And within this irozen time is another separation,
created by silence* For two hours we will not speak,
except in hushed tones, and like us, our neighbors in the
audience will respect this vow of temporary silence.
Only the photons beamed over our heads will express
themselves. Onlv thev will exist.
# ■>
63
/ v a n - C 1 a it d e C a r rl e re
I'o this traditional separation, which we experience
in the blackness ol the auditorium, and which constantly
reinforces the realistic power of photography, television
has added considerable technical modifications. These
change our relationship with the reality offered us. The
first casualty was the luminous beam that once emanated
from the back of the auditorium and passed with its cargo
of living images through the dust-laden air above our
heads. The image now comes to us head-on; we confront
it directly. And the picture is smaller, so we dominate it
rather than feel dwarfed bv it,
Tiie fV screen is still a finite surface, but darkness no
longer reigns: visible all around us are everyday objects,
books, chairs; the phone rings; we get up for a glass of
something; we chat, hi this less dark zone, where we
might even have left lights on, other images and other
sounds discreetly compete with the television. Farewell
the monkish seclusion of the movie theatre. Reality, with
its subtleties and temptations, settles in. We are at home.
But there is more: television keeps programs coming
as rapidly as possible, one after the other, with just one
rule: stay with us. If we want to separate a film in time >
isolate it from what precedes and follows it, we must act.
Otherwise we will stumble, without missing a beat, into
a commercial, a sports program, or a news roundup* in
which real images blend dangerously with manufactured
ones. How many times, still tearful over something just
witnessed, have we not had our emotion brutally shat-
tered by the irruption of mindless music or a ludicrous
image?
Memory, like sight, is a matter of separation, of dif-
ferentiation. We really remember only what we have sin-
64
The S e c r e t La n g u a g e of F i l m
gled out. If vve want the recollection to endure, we have
to protect it from eontami nation- by -confusion. Televi-
sion, which continually mixes its genres and puts every-
thing on the same plane (no announcer is ever going to
tell us, “Don t watch what's coming, it really isn’t worth
it”), eliminates such demarcation. That is why it is first
and foremost a device for inducing oblivion. By not
allowing us to differentiate, it numbs our memory, be-
cause it mixes everything together, the serious and the
trivial, the imaginary and real. We could almost say that
television's role is to make us forget films, perhaps even
forget life.
Watching TV, we are at once less fascinated and
more distracted than at the cinema, as well as less dis-
cerning . Films we see again at home often look better
than they did in the movie house, Our critical spirit
dozes. After all, we haven't left home, we haven’t paid
(at least not obviously), and vve have the permanent op-
tion of changing channels, and even of turning off the
set. We have power over this device. To get it we spent
money. It is therefore at our service. So our nature per-
suades us — just as we almost always sing the virtues of
our own car — that it was a bargain.
Women are less scared of snakes on television than
on the cinema screen. Something bland and reassuring
has insinuated itself between us and reality. All effects
are muted. The filmed object's power of conviction
fades, The repetitious mediocrity of many TV series —
car chases, waving guns, family crises, heartbreaks—
submerges us in such a flood of cliche, of devalued
images and of commonplace sounds, that our eye and our
brain stop watching and listening to them. It is impos-
J c an-Cl a u d e ( ■ a rr i e r e
si bit* to separate any of these images from the ones sur-
rounding it. t he flood of uniformity flows slowly across
our retina without ever touching us.
Was the Romanian cameraman who filmed the trial,
execution, and burial of the Ceau§escus (an unforgettable
event in the history of television as well as of Romania)
aware of this danger? The extraordinary insistence with
which he dwelt on the dead faces, the riddled clothes,
the seeping blood, and five days later the swollen-
featured corpses emerging from the morgue to be loaded
onto hearses — everything seemed to tell us (in addition
to the clearly sacrificial aspect of the affair): take a good
look, it s them, it s really them, don't forget, never forget.
Every day we hear music that was deliberately com-
posed not to be listened to. Music for elevators, waiting
rooms, restaurants, airports, supermarkets, a sonic back-
ground our body distractedly registers, without paying it
heed, sometimes against ils will. Muzak is a syrup de-
signed to blot out the world s real noises, perhaps to
reassure us, most certainly to lull us to sleep. Similarly,
particularly on television (quite unlike what happened
with the Cean^esciLs), we live with images most as-
suredly designed not to be looked at. Seen, perhaps, but
not looked at.
Such images (we should find a name for them) fulfill
the same function as Muzak. They draw' a veil between
us and reality; they hide the world from us. A police
series featuring injury-proof cops makes a total travesty
of the reality of crime and the real work of the police. It
is as if a whole citv were masked. Bv their very ordinal i-
66
Th e S e c ret L a ri g u Q * £ r o f F i l m
ness, these ordinary images hide what they claim to de-
pict. Without realizing it, we become habituated to this
false world; it makes us see the city we live in as if it
were wearing makeup. We no longer even see it— to the
point where real violence, everyday violence, seems to
us clumsy, incoherent, badly timed, Unprepared lor the
encounter, we stare in surprise. We have trouble be-
lieving it
In some cases, film actually blinds us to who we are,
to our country and our culture, Quite often in France
suspects hauled into police stations ask to see an 'attor-
ney/' They use the English word, behaving as if they
were in a film. Ignorant of French judicial practice, they
observe American law and procedure. One reality drives
away another, And here too, error wins out.
What about variety shows, where the rule is for ev-
eryone to smile as tooth i ly as possible? Or programs sup-
posedly for the young — and here I have a particular
Brazilian show in mind — which show beautiful women,
generally blonde and mini skirted, mobbed by packs of
children of every color? These programs seem to be on
daily, and for hours on end they project an image of the
world that is diametrically opposed to the daily life of
those same children, who will be back on their mean
streets once the broadcast is over.
What is the point? T,., make real life disappear? To
ward oil the world?
In the images we receive, everything becomes more
and more like everything else. It is hard to surprise or
unsettle us. There we sit, slumped and heavy-lidded.
Images move deceptively before our half-closed eyes,
and we think we are looking at them. They appear to
67
/ e a n -Claude Ca rr i e re
mesmerize, but in fact they do not interest us. Every
kind of joy and horror can come into our homes without
disturbing us. We drink tea. we even consume hearty
meals as we watch scenes of desolation and famine. In a
sense, none ol it affects us. The TV set transforms every
apartment into a little fortress. If the set is on, it means
all is well. Peace and order reign. The sad news we are
seeing comes from elsewhere, from another country, an-
other planet.
Basically, television is not of this world.
Here again we see the astonishing speed with which
the first phase of cinema history has played itself out. As
the aesthetic revolution gathered momentum, the spec-
tator's attitude also changed radically, in just two or three
generations. Those who stiffened in (ear in their seats at
the image of an oncoming train have become lumpish,
unfeeling couch potatoes, reacting with the same bovine
indifference to hours of glittering extravaganza as to
hard- h i tting news re po rts .
Images come and go. They flow over us, and our
hides grow thicker.
And what exactly are these images for? We aren't
sure. No one has ever bothered to tell us. Do we get to
know each other better, to be better neighbors? What a
joke! To make a little money, yes certainly; to kill time;
but also to be like everyone else. Who today does not
he! ieve he lives in the 'image civilization”? People tell
us so, over and over, and we repeat it. We are perma-
nently lapped around by images, at home, in the street,
in subways and cars; they even build walls of images,
and soon holography will give us houses and buildings
of images, A planet of images. Images that move, talk,
68
7 ' h e S e c ret La ngu a g e of F ilm
make noises. Images that obliterate (but do nothing to
cure) our sense of solitude.
Yet we do not see them. Their sheer numbers and
mediocrity prevent it. And as image has piled upon
image (why did we call all this piling-up civilization?),
reality has crumbled away. There is widespread talk of
the disappearance of the image, drowned in its own su-
perabundance. It could be that our world, more and
more seen, is less and less understood.
It may he advisable when making films to be ignorant of
the astonishing power that comes, or used to come, from
the moving picture. Or, on the contrary, it may be advis-
able to be aware of it, to think about it, I don t know.
Thoughtful filmmakers are not necessarily the best ones.
r I hey are dogged at every turn by the somewhat morbid
temptations of analysis. On the other hand, it does no
harm to stop from time to time, to think back, to ask
yourself questions, to try to get organized — even if to-
morrow everything blows apart.
This captivating power of the image obviously has its
limits. We may he dulled, but the sentinels slumbering
within us are still there. Foremost among them is bore-
dom, good old boredom, that wonderful faculty of ours
for losing interest, for instinctively refusing the medioc-
rity that is offered to us. Boredom is our faithful ally, our
front-line natural defense, the one enemies have trouble
hoodwinking.
How indeed could someone persuade us, once bore-
dom has settled in, that we are not bored? A most diffi-
cult undertaking, for boredom- the-vigi hint, which does
6.9
/ e a ri - C l a u d € C a r ri e re
not report to the brain, is utterly reliable and perma-
nently on watch*
Boredom is pure, incorruptible, irrefutable. it is es-
corted by physical, visible signs, against which all argu-
ments are vain. It begins with a leeling of lightness in
the pit of the stomach, closely followed by rapid blink-
ing, harbinger of yawns. Our attention wanders, our eyes
cease to focus, we start to notice the people around us,
the auditorium, die tempting lights discreetly marking
the exit; we wonder what time it might be, we wonder
which restaurant to head for after the show, vve even
think of tomorrow's schedule* Deep down we would like
the film to speed up and reach a rapid conclusion, we
would like to be an hour older. We try to list all the
things we might have been able to do had vve not chosen
to come here; there is even anger at ourselves, at the
reviewers or the friends who recommended this film.
We tend to overlook boredom, that shining virtue
perhaps peculiar to our species. But we should rely on
it, honor it, for it has shaken free of even the most secret
and insidious of our mental processes; it appears unbid-
den, from nowhere, and invariably takes us bv surprise.
Well, what do you know, I'm bored! You notice it sud-
denly, like a nosebleed, like the urge to urinate. You
can t wish it away. Boredom is conclusive: it is the irre-
futable proof of the failure of what we are watching. No
argument can budge it, nothing can cure it. It pierces the
mask. It reveals the false behind what we thought was
real.
Beside it stands another vigilant ally: "good taste,"
in other words our own taste, whose rightness we do not
question. But of course as soon as we mention taste.
70
T he S e c re t Lang u a g e of F i f m
everything becomes ambiguous. Even if what we are
seeing seems hateful, there will always be someone to
sing its praises. Nothing is less certain than taste, partic-
ularly the good variety. In film as elsewhere, we more
often agree on dislikes than likes. Other people’s enthu-
siasms always surprise us. We rarely share them.
We also know that at its birth virtually every master-
piece was rejected and reviled. It is almost a rule.
Every truly powerful work has to disturb. In fact, it
is the sign of its power. I remember one day in Mexico
bringing Runnel the reviews of one of our films. The
Phantom of Liberty, which had just come out in Paris.
Runnel took the clippings and read them. When 1 saw
him again next day he looked gloomy. When I asked him
why, he replied:
“For the first time in my life the reviews are all good,
A bad sign/'
A Runnel who no longer disturbed, a pleasant, agree-
able B uhuel, accepted by even the most respectable
publications: inconceivable, intolerable, even dis-
graceful!
Luckily the film was shown at the New York Film
Festival a few weeks later, and Newsweek* $ reviewer
savaged it. Luis's smile returned.
Unanimous approval is dangerous, and not just for
Buhuel, for it may imply a conciliatory, soporific, and
ultimately conventional work. Yet we seek approval
most hungrily: on it hangs success, in other words the
chance to make another film, and then perhaps another,
and so on.
The defensive rampart of boredom, the rampart of
the critical mind buttressed by our innate good taste, by
71
/ e a n - C / a u d e C a rri e re
our knowledge, by our cultural baggage f Tin sure I’ve
seen that shot somewhere else' 1 ). The querulous mind
which so easily awakens the little judge slumbering in
us all — that cold, ungenerous little judge, who has usu-
ally paid for his tic ket and wants his money s worth. The
second a hint of boredom deflects our attention from the
screen, all these contradictory rumbles swirl over us as
we sit there in the darkness. As long as the film holds us,
nothing can touch us; we forget ourselves* But let the
smallest thread snap — and sometimes it can be almost
nothing, a clumsy phrase, a too-abrupt or too-slow ges-
ture — and a thousand buried feelings surface: vague dis-
taste, outright revulsion, a jealous twinge, resentment,
sometimes even real shame just at being there, obscene
gw ilt at having squandered any sum however small on
an endeavor that suddenly looks pathetic.
Occasionally, too, there is an irrational dislike for an
actor, because everything, or almost everything, in this
domain is subjective. Unless they strike us as utterly
neutral and boring, we feel instant sympathy or antipa-
thy for actors. We want either to embrace or to strike or
to Hee them. And then there are whatever memories we
might have of their former roles, which superimpose
themselves like decals on their present images.
Every relationship between us and the actor, includ-
ing our opinion of his work, must be transmitted af-
fectively, through an unconscious rapport, an unspoken
bond, of the kind we can have either with a family mem-
ber or with an unknown person in the street There is no
rigid yardstick; even physical beauty, so decisive in the
Hollywood of the 1930 s, is no longer essential to the
72
Th e S e c re t L a n gn a ge of F 1 1 m
seducer. No one has ever been able to say what makes a
star, why such and such a woman appears at a given
moment to embody the desires and fears ol her people,
or even (depending on the commercial influence of the
country she lives in) of other peoples, of all peoples* This
affective connection — often very hard to bear, despite
appearances, for the man or woman so elected — is pure
mystery. It makes us swallow absurd stories because
they are linked to a character who in our eyes can do no
wrong. At other times it is the other way around: ’ If only
he hadn't been in id He ruined the whole thing for me!’
No matter how great his talent, the actor we do not like
destroys the story he tells. He prevents it from reaching
us, and we blame him tor it, sometimes to such an extent
that if a certain actor is appearing in a film people recom-
mend to me, I refuse to go.
A ridiculous attitude, but what can you do? The actor
is a looking-glass in which it is impossible for everyone
at once to recognize himself, no matter how flattering or
seductive or moving the reflection thrown back. That
reflection is always about ns* or at least a part of us, and
we all want to hold on to a certain image of ourselves.
The identification phenomenon — that jewel of cinema,
magical transference, the secret journey from one heart
to another — is probably beyond rational explanation. It
rattles too many imperfectly known parameters. When
an actor's presence in a specific situation is all-powerful
and irresistible, it sweeps everything before it, placates
and blinds every conscience, The cinema draws us out-
side ourselves, actually stowing the movement of our
hearts and lungs. It is difficult to go on talking about
73
/ e a n-Clau de C a r r i ere
reality, since what we are doing is slipping inside an
image, inside a body that is not ours, in a setting that is
not ours.
Except on the rarest of occasions, the theatre does
not really possess this ultimate weapon of great classical
cinema. No matter how overwhelming, the stage actor
remains himself, distinct from us, He speaks for us and
suffers in our stead, not stripping ns of ourselves the way
film at its best can sometimes do. He remains a creature
of flesh and blood, an animated mind, actually present
before us. He may have other assets, often powerful
ones, but he does not have the privilege (if it is one) of
offering himself to us on-screen for a few hours of inti-
macy in a darkened auditorium. He is not a meticulously
crafted image welcoming us with open arms into his
world.
But with that said, and having paid passing tribute to
the phenomenon, we are aware that this almost primitive
bond is really a thing of the past. It belongs to the great
reign of stars who magnified the everyday, bathing it in
light (not for nothing were they stars), transforming
every individual. Today too many arms are opened to
welcome us. Too many idols, too many mirrors, too many
new faces week after week. Too many voluptuous bodies
in the harem. We fragment ourselves, we dissipate our-
selves, and we are sent back to our solitude sooner than
we used to be.
The now'- threatened power to fascinate is reality in de~
dine; images defeated by their very frequency: the tele-
74
7 1 // e S e c re t L a n gu a gc of F i / m
vision habit that has so swiftly transformed us has also
led to a curious weakening of the filmed image,
A hegemony is under assault It is a dangerous chal-
lenge, for cinema has a visceral need for this physical
power to persuade, almost to mesmerize* If it loses this
invisible link, it loses its essence, perhaps even its rea-
son for being,
Everything in the cinema happens in ways diametri-
cally opposed to the ways of the theatre, where reality
is never perceived as true. However powerful a stage
performance, we are still at the theatre: no Kabyle
woman could imagine that actors really die on stage
(after all, they even step forward to take their bow at the
final curtain). We are touched only by a secondary real-
ity, a reality of another order, easy to feel, difficult to
describe.
Film can (or could at one time) literally possess us,
in the double meaning of the word: it takes possession
of us, dominates and manipulates its; and it also takes us
in, deceives us, Here we have a paradox, Cinema makes
use of illusion precisely because it is a sequence of pho-
tos set in motion, given sound, and then projected onto a
determined area; precisely because it is an art rooted in
reality, as if in exploiting illusion it acknowledges its
inability to grasp and reconstruct that strange reality
which even scientists hesitate to give a name.
Theatre is rooted in illusion, and makes no bones
about it. Instead of trying to hide the fact, it often pro-
claims it, shouts it from the rooftops. We are in the the-
atre, the lights go down, we are about to see actors. No
cheating there! And from this openly acknowledged
*7 sr
fO
/ e a n - C / a u d e Carrie re
artifice, truth will either emerge or remain skulking in
its lair.
But things are not always so simple. Forty or fifty
years ago, overwhelmed and dazzled by the wonders of
film, some theatre directors tried to fight back with the
enemy's weapons and on the enemy’s terrain. Like
nineteenth -century painters striving to do work more
real than photography, theatre directors fought back with
a kind of hyperrealism.
This was truly a perversion of theatre. One French
theatrical performance in the 1960s even advertised it-
self as being “just like the movies T
Which in itself makes no sense. Would we say the
sea is fake if painted on a theatre backcloth and real if
projected onto a screen? The screen sea is not the real
sea either. It is a picture of the sea. Sometimes, on a
theatre stage, a small puddle of real water is all you need
to give a powerful impression, a realistic impression, of
shoreline and open sea.
But in neither case can we speak of reality.
Once over the perverse urge to imitate a new form
of expression in which the sky seemed the limit — as in
painting after the shock of photography — the theatre
soon found its direction again, but with a new boldness
and power that stemmed directly from the life -or- death
need to set itself apart from film.
Hence the astonishing freedom the theatre has
forged for itself in the last thirty years, a period when the
cinema was in its turn discovering, not without surprise,
its new limits.
More easily and above all more naturally than cin-
v #
emu, the theatre can evoke and bring to life the audi-
76
Th e S £ c re t L a n g u a ge o / Film
ence’s imaginings, its hidden visions. II at a given point
in the Mahabharata an inspired actor says to us, “I see
our elephants in the plain, their trunks severed, spewing
blood/' no spectator turns to look for elephants at the
back of the auditorium. He sees them, il all goes well,
somewhere inside himself. They appear independently
of all realistic context, brought into being by the actor s
fine performance and by the precise images it unveils for
us, forces us to dig for and to see. They are images that
all have something in common, yet all look different to
each one of us.
Th is is a process that would he almost totally unac-
ceptable in film. Film has to show the elephants. It has
no choice; it is part of the contract each spectator made
when he paid for his ticket. Indeed, special-effects teams
will be assigned to create fake trunks spurting lake blood
— no easy matter: in Quest for Fire, jean- Jacques A maud
had to disguise elephants as mammoths. He shudders at
the memory.
In cinema the imagination is less alert, more passive.
It relies on and believes in technique. It does its secret
work only in slow motion, and in other areas. It expects
the film to do the routine work. Not to show the stricken
elephants would almost certainly trigger a frustration
which would cost the film's creators and producers
dearly, unless of course they made the elephants' ab-
sence an exercise in style, an experiment, for example
making a film based on third-person stories. But in that
case it might be advisable to warn the customers ahead
of time*
When I began to write for the theatre twenty years
ago, people around me said, “You’re crazy, you’re doing
77
J e an -Cl a u cl e C a rr i e re
well in films, why do yon want to work in theatre? The
theatre s washed up, movies and TV are going to gobble
everything up, soon there won't be any theatre left. ’
Some added, 1 "Theatre is limited, narrow, conven-
tion-bound, In film you can show everything and do
everything!'’
1 had no answer at the time, except perhaps that I
felt a need to work in theatre and had no idea where that
need came from, I wrote a first play that was a hit, a
second that Hopped, Being equally fond of both plays,
like every author, 1 had no idea why they met such dif-
ferent receptions. I was puzzled. It was then I met Peter
Brook. He led me off on a very long journey.
At about the same time cinema was treading water,
after the surges of the New Wave and of films made in
Italy, Germany, Brazil, and one or two other countries.
Theatre, meanwhile, had been stood on its head. Every-
thing was shattered. The rigid framework of the standard
stage (which had inspired the cinema screen) burst wide
open, as theatre invaded auditoriums and spilled into
warehouses, railroad stations, trains, prisons. It moved
from two-room theatre (clear-cut separation of perform-
ers and spectators) to one-room theatre, in which every-
one occupies the same place on the same day to take part
in the same experience and the same specific emotion.
Theatre — hitherto confined to a stage lit by footlights
— was discovering the heady joys of space, of true space,
the kind you share, in which you breathe together. In
film, no matter how vast the horizon, space remains an
illusion. It is only the image of space. Theatre, on the
other hand, by invading untoward places, by exploiting
the shifting subtleties of light, has learned how to multi-
78
The Secret L a n guag e of F i I m
ply and transform its space, sometimes creating it out of
a single gesture by an actor.
Far from disappearing, as the prophets of doom had
foretold, the theatre, freed of the fatal urge to reproduce
fleeting reality, today seems more vital than ever
throughout the world. Indeed, it can seem that the
higher you heap one pan of the scales with technological
wonders— synthetic images, electronic cassettes, laser-
read discs, satellites, high definition— the lower the
other pan will sink under the weight of what l believe is
the finest material — human material, the living material
of the actor. We had believed theatre was threatened,
yet it has won the day, swung the scales. All the more
decisively, for by emerging from the confinement of clas-
sical theatrical space, theatre has learned how to travel.
Clearly threatened by cinema s gift for the spectacular, it
has suddenly become lighter, stripped itself of its former
pomp, rediscovered a direct, real approach, even occa-
sionally pushing the link with the audience's imagina-
tion to extreme limits.
In a production Peter Brook put on at the Bouffes du
Nord in Paris in December 1989 (an adaptation of Woza
Albert , a South African play by Mbongeni Ngema, Percy
Mtwa, and Barney Simon), two French-speaking black
actors, M amadou I bourne and Bakary San gar e, played
a whole series of South African characters, sometimes
white, sometimes black. When they had to turn into
whites, Peter simply asked them to pull a little tube
of white cream from their pockets and daub a streak on
their noses. Swiftly and openly done, it did not disguise
the actors (who obviously remained black), but it permit-
ted an extra level of complicity with the audience with-
79
J e a n- C / a u d e ( ■ a r r i ere
out in any way detracting from its laughter or its tears.
Quite the contrary, in fact* In the original version of the
same play, the two performers put on and took off a white
nose as their roles demanded. And so forth. A thousand
overt and visible tricks are permissible.
But who would risk them in film? Experiments of
this kind have opened only narrow pathways, often inter-
esting, hut rapidly closing again. The cinema remains
quite fundamentally a realistic medium. Whether in an
auditorium or on a TV screen, it is still just that isolated
rectangle made up of successive photos. And its legend-
ary power ("you can show everything in cinema”) has by
the same token become its strange new weakness: "you
ha ve to s how e very t h i ng on film.”
Yet film does not show everything. It struggles cease-
lessly against its own condition, and one way or another,
every great filmmaker was born from that struggle. The
people who "do films " the way they would do anything
else simply set up the camera at the Hkeliest-looki ng
spot and film action that is basically a string of illusions
and clumsy approximations. Working in a ready-made
language to which they add nothing, they reiterate forms
which are only thirty or forty years old but which already
seem archaic to us. It is as if they had turned a blind eye
to the essential matter, to the real struggle. Unable to
cope with this hybrid reality, they resort to the facile, the
iincontroversial.
At the other extreme, the filmmaker determined truly
to express himself through film first of all confronts film’s
major obstacle, which is also its foremost weapon: the
reality of the image. He seeks, he fights, he dares, and
sometimes he even finds. He can distort that reality, like
HO
The Secret Language of Film
F. W, Murnau in Nosferatu, or on the contrary pretend
to respect it in order the more gently to mask it, like Jean
Renoir in Une Fartie de Campagne. He may proclaim
and emphasize it, like Vittorio de Sica and Roberto Ros-
sellini, or transfigure it, like Orson Welles and Federico
Fellini, But every significant work has to go through this
struggle. Otherwise, defeated in advance, the work be-
comes fuzzy, becomes one with the amorphous ness in
which we usually live. It lacks independent life; it van-
ishes the moment it appears.
In this inevitable, often obsessive, sometimes even
insurmountable relationship with reality, cinema has
turned to cheating in order to circumvent the obstacles
reality raises. Some of its tricks occur so frequently that
they are like a second reality slipped inside the first. We
no longer — or hardly ever— notice them.
We know, for example, that in film a character always
finds an unoccupied taxi ready to pick him up the second
he needs it. On leaving the taxi a little later he pays the
exact fare, never waiting for change, never even check-
ing the meter.
On the phone (totally lost time, which is why good
screenwriters avoid it), film characters always dial at top
speed, dialing six figures instead of seven, or seven in-
stead of eight. The person at the other end picks up at
once, as if waiting by the phone for the call.
Still on the phone, employing a formula borrowed
straight from between -the- wars theatre, the character on
screen always repeats his unseen interlocutor's words:
“How are you? Better? I'm so glad , , , And your wife?
She’s left you? Are you serious? She left with Maurice?
And so on.
HI
/ v a n-Cia it d e C a r r i e r e
In real life, of course, no one talks on the phone in
this way.
And no one— or so we fervently hope— makes love
the way they do in film. I n the past, when a couple finally
found themselves in bed together, the camera was polite
enough (or perverse enough) to gaze discreetly at the
curtains or the ceiling decoration, letting the lovers have
at it off-camera. Today we show it all. We flaunt it. We
require the unfortunate actors, often victims of mutual
loathing, to pretend to love each other, to love each other
physically and in a most intimate fashion in the presence
of a good two-score highly attentive technicians.
The results are nearly always deplorable, and re-
niarkably unconvincing. In so-called soft scenes (often
called "erotic" to distinguish them from true pornogra-
phy), when the male member is not shown in full erec-
tion, penetration (off-camera) is always effected with
astounding ease, apparently without the woman remov-
ing her pants or the man his trousers, without a down-
ward glance or fumbling helping hand, without a
second s hesitation. Further, ecstasy occurs for both part-
ners after barely a dozen reciprocal thrusts. Here too, as
with phones and cabs, the accent is on haste. Thus to-
day s films are a welter of premature ejaculations, unless,
as in the theatre, these represent an experiment in style,
in suggestion. But if so, why get down to the action at
all? Everyone knows that the most erotically powerful
images, the kind we have occasionally encountered in
the cinema or elsewhere, most often stem from stimula-
tion, from suggestion, from promise rather than perfor-
mance. So why this mania for showing us badly made
love? Nor is the demonstration any more convincing in
82
The Secret Language of Film
hard or X-rated films. Here the depiction of lovemaking
is actually even less honest, because it appears more
real. They certainly seem to make wild and uninhibited
love in these films, and in every conceivable position* In
fact, that is all they do; one organ penetrates another,
orgasm is v isible. The man s in any case; its visibility is
even part of the actor s contract, with ejaculation taking
place on-screen, fully lit. with no receptacle in sight, to
prove that the rnarhs pleasure was not simulated. Hence
the strange mania for coitus interrupt us by hard-core
studs who then ejaculate outside their partners.
But they do ejaculate. I have seen it. I cannot deny
it, and Doubting Thomas would agree with me (adding
Ins own shocked cries). Perhaps these are not ideal or-
gasms, but that is none of my business.
For the woman, on the other hand, the lie is total.
Act-as-if is the watchword. Hard films give a new lease
on life to the shameful tradition of beer-hall songs and
what used to be called lurid novels, in which the good
lover is a sort of blind and brutal stallion who makes love
six or seven times a night and in which the woman — in
any case a submissive creature- — takes tier pleasure at
the same breakneck pace and with no hint of clitoral
stimulation. Everything from moans to swoons is fake,
utterly fake. And it sets a bad example, not for piffling
moral reasons (which are none of my business) but quite
simply because this particular lie could lead tm informed
couples to believe that things happen and should hap-
*
pen that way, resulting in a totally mistaken notion of
love.
In New York in the 1960s, I once sat in on the shoot-
ing of an X-rated movie. There was a man and two naked
S3
J e a n - C / a u d e C a r r i e re
women in a Greenwich Village house, A small crew* A
director and a cameraman, E spent ten minutes seated on
a chair politely watching it all. You are very quickly
struck by the everyday, joylessly professional, matter-of-
fact tone: 1 Turn that way a bit, Lisa . , . Yes, a little more
, , , Raise that knee a couple of inches . . . OK, keep
going, keep going
Where is the pleasure in it? No one asks for love —
but pleasure?
I thought that day of a remark by Andre Breton, in
which he defined eroticism as ‘ a sumptuous ceremony
in an underground passageway*’*
That kind of film h a s be tray e d u s . W h at h as i t I e ft u s
o I ce re m on y , of sens 1 10I i ty f of sombe r subte rfuge ?
And what about realism? Made- to- order female or-
gasm is clearly a sham; furthermore, male orgasm does
not happen as easily as people believe, despite appear-
ances, In fact, everything in this repetitious and dully
predictable sequence of staged routines is cut, spliced,
and edited as for a film. The continuity essential to love
disappears* The action is accelerated by tricks of cutting:
we even hop fairly often from one face to the other, and
there is no guarantee that the male member I see ejacu-
lating in closeup is the same one I saw laboring away in
a medium-close shot a moment ago. Mountains of pre-
meditated trickery surround these naked bodies, which
are supposed to be holding nothing back * , *
The same could he said about martial-arts films, and
more generally about all film brawls, in which blows
never really land and the illusion of violence comes from
movement and especially from sound, from the noise ol
the blow tacked on later in the studio. Enormous port-
84
Th e S e ere t Langua g e of F i I m
able killing machines fire off devastating projectiles.
Their explosions make a terrifying but artificial din,
often constructed of synthetic sounds. Bullets tear huge
bloody holes in hostile chests, Never was anything of the
kind seen in pictures of real war. And almost never in a
real-life street fight does a man drop senseless from a
single blow.
Some lies are by omission. For example, if a story
does not call for the presence of children, a couple can
live together for years and make love every day (and this
rule has been in force since before the advent of the Fill)
with no hint of offspring or discussion of the possibility.
Yet in other stories a man and woman meet, are at-
tracted, make love just once and the woman is pregnant.
In the cinema every activity is familiar and easy,
Characters know how to swim, read, dance, ride, speak
foreign languages. They always find a hotel room, and
when they ring for the bellhop he appears at once. Cars
start at the first try and the cavalry (almost) always arrives
just in time, You shave without cutting yourself and
smoke without getting sick. You urinate with extreme
rarity — never mind the other, which you never do.
Women wake up with their makeup on and their hair
done. Travelers lug enormous suitcases with the greatest
of ease. The same goes for a man carrying a woman in
his anus: some thus burdened can climb several flights
without faltering. When a character takes notes, or writes
to dictation, he does it at dizzying speed, as fast as the
person speaking. And when a young woman of quite in-
tellectual aspect is brushed by love s wing, a true optica!
miracle occurs: she suddenly gives up wearing glasses
without any apparent effect on her ability to read or
85
/ ea n - C l a u d e C a r r i e re
write. The heroes of Westerns not only have inexhaust-
ible ammunition in their guns, they also manage to bring
down their foes at incredible distances, even though a
revolver — as we all learn in the army — is wildly inaccu-
rate beyond fifteen or twenty feet. Critically wounded
men suddenly sit bolt upright in their hospital beds, rip
out their intravenous tubes, and stalk outside to settle
accounts.
Another constant: a man has just committed a crime;
lie escapes, gets to his hideout, and turns on the radio or
TV. Invariably, at that very moment, the announcer is
speaking of his crime and getaway.
And so it goes, on and on, each item accompanied by
the Hot breath of cliche* All these run-of-the-mill tricks,
all these improbable acts that are nevertheless part of
everyday cinema reality, have proliferated beyond belief
in what we call 'fantasy movies {flying men, talking
dogs, uncanny mental powers, aliens) and in adventure
fiction, from Robin Hood to James Rond, in which a hero
takes on the impossible and sweeps everything, even the
laws of probability, before him. So much so that in
French the expression c’est du cinema soon came to
mean “that's fake, that's bullshit.” And when someone
tries to dazzle you, promises more than he can deliver,
the French say, 'll fait son cinema k meaning ‘He's
feeding you a line.
And here the provisional paradox ends. Since its raw
material is filmed reality, the cinema has had to cheat
more often and more skillfully than other Forms of ex-
pression, Daily exposed to the temptations of facility, it
has invented countless new forms of lying. Behind its
depiction of the attitudes and events of what it claims
86
7 ’ h f; ,S e c r et La n g u a g e of F i f m
to he everyday life, it often distorts feelings and ideas.
Emboldened by laws of probability that are exclusively
cinematographic ("this has to be true— I saw it at the
movies' ), it routinely depicts irrational conduct which
nevertheless, from pure habit and inertia, seems normal
to us. And yet at the same time it systematically rejects
everything that in real life strikes us as unusual or pre-
posterous. For we all have examples of real events,
things which really happened to us or which we know to
he true, but which we would never allow into one ol our
films. How many times do we say sadly ol some real-
life event, ‘That would never work in a screenplay.
Coincidences, improbable happenings — the truth is not
consistently convincing. We have always known that.
Film, which so often ventures into the unreal, persis-
tently forgoes a reality it finds too hard to swallow.
Greta Garbo is ushered into the office of businessman
John Gilbert, Flawless as ever, face inscrutable, she
takes the chair in front of him without even removing
her coat.
This erotic scene is from a silent film, A Woman of
Affairs, directed by Clarence Brown in 1929. The film, a
hit in its day, has left no very memorable trail. But it
might be interesting to recall today, with bare flesh ev-
erywhere, with ubiquitous penetration, how in that age
of strict censorship the cinema cheated and invented in
order to say everything without showing anything. In
other words, how a resolutely unrealistic scene could
acquire real power.
Garbo puts her hand on the arm of her chair. On the
87
7 e a n - C f a u d e C a rr i e re
hand is a ring decorated with a big dark stone. The ring
is too big for her finger. The businessman, seated behind
his desk, ai i d a I read y distur be <. I b v t h e p re s e n ce o f h i s
visitor (whom he has met before), notices this ring and
says words that appear in a sub title inset:
Your ring is loose.
An exchange ol glances. Then Garbo, still cold and
aloof, replies (another inset, forcing the dialogue writer
to the strictest economy):
'Tve been told Tin like that ring— apt to fall,
'The man looks at her and says nothing. He believes
neither his eves nor his ears. Did the woman wear this
ring on purpose, just to provoke that remark and that
reply? We have no idea — but we can dream, John Gil-
bert dreams too, A woman is sitting across from him, the
woman is the peerless Greta Garbo, an actress at the top
of her profession, known the world over, and this woman
is hinting that she is apt to fall.
She rises slowly, removes her coat, just her coat, and
in a dark suit, also sober and unexceptionable, she walks
to a nearby couch and sits down. This couch, its shape
and height carefully calculated, looks remarkably soft
Greta Garbo sinks into it and looks at the man. She is
fully dressed. You cannot even see her knees,
■w
Still seated behind his desk, John Gilbert looks back
at her through glittering eyes lined with black makeup,
Now he seems frightened, for he is faced with the inevi-
table, which is at the same time the unpredictable, the
inconceivable* Fate has seated itseli on the couch. Who
would have thought it just five minutes ago ? A woman of
whom you and I would not even have dreamed, a woman
no man touches, is sitting there in your office, on your
88
T h e S € c re t La n g u a g a of F i I m
couch, and telling you (another subtitle) that she loves
you.
A minute to shatter a man s day, perhaps his life,
Gilbert rises in turn, removing neither tie nor shoes.
Love here operates in the absolute, without everyday
constraints, without the almost invariably absurd need
to lower one s trousers.
He approaches the couch and sits beside the woman*
They exchange a few glances and two more subtitles.
Their feelings are no longer in doubt. They are soon in
one another's arms. Then Garbo falls back on the couch,
drawing the man down as she sinks. And just as quickly,
the camera leaves them. It follows Garbo’ s hand, which
slips from couch to floor. The ring slowly slips from her
finger and falls soundlessly to the rug. Silence, palpable
even in a silent film.
This scene, from an unambitious melodrama, is in
appearance ordinary enough, with the unseen and the
unspoken triumphing at every step, with not even one
bone for the censor to pick. Yet the scene suggests,
evokes, pushes open all the right doors within us. Every-
thing in it is visible and comprehensible, even the ma-
neuvering, even the possibility of deceit
But ordinary realitv has been eliminated. Nobody
■< *
wonders where the bathroom is, or if a secretary will
appear without warning. All these reasonable questions
no longer count. What counts is the scene s style, that
notion oi the ring and all the suggestions that follow
upon it* Its authors hope that this idea has a strong
enough hold for the audience not to ask itself the other
questions, the practical questions.
In this scene love, or at any rate a form of love, has
89
J e a n - C 1 a u d a C u r ri e re
virtually been invented. It will eventually give birth to
all the cliches— the camera panning at the crucial mo-
ment to the crackling wood fire, to toppling shoes, to
clothing tossed to the mg, to the music from a record
player — hut for the period, 1929, the characters move-
ments retain all their freshness, all the insolence of
invention.
The scene from A Woman of Affairs, duly submitted
to the censors, could he characterized as 'stopping this
side of reality/ And the constraints imposed by censor-
ship were, of course, the direct source of the scene's
strength.
It was one way of proceeding, one way of handling a
reality both taboo and difficult to convey, downplaying
matters politely and by the rules — which can also some-
times mean disaster. In Franco's Spain it was forbidden
to mention adultery on-screen. A wife could not have a
lover, nor a man a mistress. So in Spanish versions of
foreign films these characters were renamed brothers
and sisters, which led to highly alarming scenes. In Hack
Street , Charles Boyer wonders tearfully if he dares run
away with his sister. Incest, in the name of family values,
had entered Iberian cinemas,
And so it goes. The effects of censorship have often
been perverse.
At the opposite pole there have been a few— a very
few— who dreamed of making the screen explode, de-
stroy ing paradox, going beyond the barriers technology
imposes on our perceptions.
One is Bimueh In one of his very rare lectures, at the
University of Mexico in 1953, lie said:
The screen s white eyelid would have only to re-
90
The Secret Language oj Film
fleet the light peculiar to it and we could blow up the
universe. ... Fi Im is a magnificent and dangerous
weapon if it is wielded by a free mind, It is the finest
instrument we know for expressing the world ol dreams,
of feeling, of instinct. The mechanism that creates cine -
matographic images is, by its very function, the form of
human expression most closely resembling the work of
the mind during sleep. Film seems to be an involuntary
imitation of dream , . * the darkness that gradual I > in-
vades tlit 1 auditorium is the equivalent of closing our
eyes. It is the moment when the nightly incursion into
the unconscious begins on the screen and deep inside
mam As in dream, images appearand disappear in ’dis-
solves, and time and space become flexible, contracting
or expanding at will. Chronological order and relative
duration no longer correspond to reality, . .
On the verge ol this plunge into the unconscious,
which is not only the unseen but the unknown, the'
ground seems ripe for hallucination, for surpassing and
forgetting the self (which is the condition for discovery
of self), for tin 1 gentle or ungentle overturning of barriers.
And it happens sometimes without warning. At the end
of Rosemary's lUthtj, directed by Roman Polanski, many
spectators stiu tile monstrous child, the Devil s spawn,
in his crib. Some. I remember, even described him in
detail. And yet that image does not occur, not even licet-
mgly, anywhere in the film. Polanski never filmed it His
characters lean over the crib, look at the* baby, talk about
him. Our deep-seated perception, if we are among those
who see the young monster, here goes further than the
film itself: it opens up, turns itself inside out, and finally
sees the unseeable.
91
J e a n-Cl a u cl e C a r ri e re
The end of Bunuers Belle de jour brought a similar
surprise. This is a truly inexplicable scene, halfway
between reality and fantasy, in which the heroine
Severine's conflicts seem suddenly to be resolved. Her
husband, sitting paralyzed in a wheelchair, abruptly
rises as if cured, whereupon a tear (of forgiveness?) runs
down his cheek. He walks smiling toward his wife, who
watches him and seems happy- They go together to the
window. Outside, an empty coach crosses the autumn
landscape, doubtless carrying the heroine's dangerous
fantasies off to an unknown destination.
But what reality are we in, what stage of the story
have we reached? Neither Bunuel nor I nor the actors
could say. Every attempt to explain struck us as arrogant,
disastrous. During shooting, Bunuel gave the performers
only elementary physical instructions; he made no at-
tempt to penetrate the story's various psychological lay-
ers, as if he wished to respect the mystery For its own
sake, to work in the same mists as the actors. It was a
scene dreamed up in one evening after fairly exhaustive
research, a scene which so moved Luis as it was being
filmed that tears came to his eyes when he described it.
But afterward we discussed it very little. When you are
lucky enough to encounter true mystery, Bunuel often
said, you must respect it, And dissecting mystery is like
violating a child.
When the film came out a great many women spoke
to us of the baby they had seen during this sequence. Yet
another baby. But what baby? There is no baby here, or
in any other scene in the film. Yet some female specta-
tors swore they remembered an infant crying. Luis ad-
mittedly inserted a cat's mewing into the soundtrack to
92
77t e S e ere t L a n g u a g e of F ilm
help recall an earlier scene. This mewing gave birth to
recollections of a baby’s cries, then of the baby itself,
absent but still visible to these women. Their secret de-
sires (but again, it is not for me to interpret motives)
were speaking loud and clear. The wall was shattered
for a few seconds, the paradox resolved.
In the same film a hefty Korean, a passing visitor at
Madame Anais s modern brothel, shows the ladies the
inside of a little box he intends to use. We do not see
what the box contains, but we hear a small indefinable
sound inside it. Horrified, two of the girls refuse. Se-
ven ne smiles and agrees, and goes into a bedroom with
the Korean and his box.
Probably more than a thousand times over the past
twenty years, 1 have been asked what was in that box. I
did not know what to say, because of course we never
knew. It stood for everyone’s secret desire, everyone's
urmameable perversion. 1 would answer as best I could,
jokingly. People would say; it was a snake, ora particu-
lar instrument shaped this or that way, and so forth.
As usual, each answer diminished the question, which
to me (with Asia’s help) seemed rather open, like a
Zen question.
One day a stranger phoned and out of the blue asked
me at what period of my life I had lived in Laos. Never,
I told him. And Luis Bumiel? Neither had he. Arc you
sure? Absolutely sure.
4 In that case, the stranger said, “how did you come
to put an old Laotian custom into Belle de Jour?'*
“Which one?”
“Why, the box the customer brings in!”
“You know what was in the box?”
93
J e a u - C l a u d e C a rri ere
"Of course”
" Tell me, quick!”
Most obligingly, and with many details, the man told
me that in die old days certain refined Laotian ladies
would truss a large beetle with a thin gold chain and set
it on their clitoris during the act of love. The wriggling
of the creature s many legs induced an indescribable de-
gree of added pleasure. The custom, added the stranger,
had in all likelihood been lost in the political and mili-
tary disasters that had befallen Southeast Asia — but here
it was, astonishingly resurrected in a French film.
[ thanked him and hung up.
For a few days this story amused me and I repeated
it to people. But I soon realized that it had turned an
open highway into a blind alley. This coincidence — sup-
posing tire story to be true— contributed nothing to the
film arid took something away from it. The indefinable
was better than the specific, however exotic. Binluel,
moreover, dreamed of slipping a few items of false infor-
mation into all his films, as if briefly to undermine and
divert the course of geography and history; true reality
irked him like a tight corset*
It was probably in his last film. That Obscure Object
of Desire, shot in 1977, that he pulled off his most aston-
ishing feat of legerdemain. While writing the screenplay,
we considered giving the role of the elusive young
woman (Conch ita) to two different actresses, turn by
turn, without warning, without announcing or stressing
the feat. We felt that certain scenes were better suited to
an elegant and rather aloof woman, while others seemed
written for an earthier actress, someone forthright— and
able to dance flamenco.
94
The S e ere t L a n gu a g e of F i I tn
In fact, we spent a half-day assigning scenes to each
one, without changing a line of the script, and of course
without having the other characters notice these sudden
substitutions*
At the end of the day, though, Bunn el decided it
was all an idle whim, lie dropped the idea, and began
shooting in the most orthodox fashion, with just one ac-
tress. But he was unable to direct her satisfactorily. Wor-
ried, unhappy with the results of the first tew days' work,
he showed the early rushes to Serge Sil Herman, the pro-
ducer, and told him disconsolately that he could not
make the film.
This took place in a bar one evening in Madrid, Sud-
denly, during a lull, doubtless remembering our earlier
and short-lived experiment, Luis asked Silberman, “Do
you believe there is one woman who could be all
women ?" 5
Silberman quickly understood what was being sug-
gested, and agreed to have two actresses play Conch ita.
This decision called into question the time-honored
notion of identification of actor with character. Although
this has sometimes happened in theatre (Hamlet played
by three different actors in the same performance, for
example), we knew of no such instance in the history of
film. Hence a definite risk, which Silberman unhesitat-
ingly accepted.
A few weeks later shooting resumed in Paris with
two actresses playing Conchita, the Spanish Angela Mo-
lina and the French Carole Bouquet. Two details: their
clothes were similar, and more important, they were
dubbed by the same voice.
But their faces, their figures, their acting style re-
35
J e a n - C l a ud e C a rr i e re
mained noticeably different, even though both were
dark-haired. Yet — and here is the mystery — many spec-
tators failed to notice that the part was played by two
different actresses. One of mv friends, normally most at-
tentive, told me that in his view there was ‘something
odd'’ about Conch ita, although lie could not put his fin-
ger on it. Some people, of course, knew beforehand, hav-
ing read about it; others duly noticed the substitution.
But a good half of the spectators saw nothing. A post-
screening poll in an American university indicated that
seventy percent of the students had not spotted the
difference.
That was indeed an example — it still astounds me
today — of mild but enduring hallucination. Should we
wonder at it, or should we be concerned? It shows the
degree to which our eyes can remain unseeing for more
than an hour and a half as a result ol the almost frighten-
ing power of our habits of perception, our secret rejec-
tion of the out-of-th e-ordinary, of all that upsets and
disconcerts.
Film: a power that placates reality.
Such examples of hijacking are rare. As Bunuel hi ni-
sei i said, We can sleep easy for now/ The opportunity
to wake from — or rather to go beyond — our hypnotic
sleep, to set in motion what is most secret in us, what
weighs heaviest, what is hardest to acknowledge: such
opportunities are for the moment almost lost. Nearly
every film we see seems chained to reality. For a thou-
sand reasons, most of them supposedly commercial, they
act as if They reconstruct. Such is cinema: chained to
what it shows us, so that we cannot follow Cezanne s
advice and 'unite women’s curves with the shoulders ol
96
The S e c r e t L a n gua g e of Fit m
bills,” We would have to have a special cinema, one
that nobody could define, one that might seem to save
appearances, to save the surface, the more insidiously to
penetrate the heart . . * Or the absolute opposite: the
kind of cinema which if it dared nothing else would dare
to go beyond labels. But I know 1 am flirting here with
utopianism and taking the easy way out — wishing for
something new. And what about habits of thinking? And
security? And money worries, those hidden censors?
In any case, dreaming of a kind of cinema that does
not yet exist (even though we might be carrying it in
embryo) means not reducing it to an investigation into
form. It means trying to open more dangerous trapdoors.
It means accepting ahead of time one's stake in a game
whose roles one does not know. It means touching secret
mechanisms we are not sure we can slow or stop once
they are in motion. And whatever else, it means knowing
from the start that reality will resist us with all its might
Nineteen years' collaboration with Biuiuel, the very
model of a modern Syfpcjnealist, taught me on a daily
basis how incredibly hard it is for us to catch reality
napping. To return to Belle de Jour: Luis did not want
the audience to see or hear any difference between the
supposed real life and the fantasies of Severine, the
young middle-class woman who spends her afternoons
at a brothel. Indeed, the whole film seems to say there is
no difference, that the imagined life is as real as the
other, and that the life we believe to he real can at any
given moment be improbable, absurd, abnormal, per-
verse, carried to extremes by our secret desires.
One of Severine’ s fantasies, one of her imaginings,
shows her going to a country chateau where a middle-
,97
J e a n - C l au d e C ' a r r i e r e
aged aristocrat asks her to lie in a coffin for a strange,
probably mastiu batory, and incidentally authentic cere-
mony (like all the film s fantasies, it was told to us). This
scene follows the visit by the duke’s manservant to the
brothel to select a girl. The manservants appearance
gave the whole chateau scene a feel of unarguable real-
ity, which was the opposite of what we intended. During
editing Luis cut out the manservant scene in order to
stress the dream quality of the visit to the chateau. Ap-
parently in vain. For most spectators the scene remained
real.
Most of the time we are defeated by reality, which is
stronger and more cunning than we are. We sometimes
try to make room for those who would like to slip their
dreams in next to ours. Nothing could be more disap-
pointing. When Bufuiel introduced a bear into the stately
home in The Exterminating Angel, critics sought in it an
allegory of Soviet Russia, and in the sheep at the end, an
o b v i t ms in i age of s 1 1 1 >j ec t p e o pics. When in 7 7 ? e D i s cree t
Charm of the Bourgeoisie we sent our characters on foot
down a road leading nowhere, people asked us where
they were going. Worse still, some spectators insisted
that they were dead, and doomed like the Wandering
J ew to etern al roan i i n g.
All those — and they are, alas, many- — who reject
dreams or detours or the smallest sidestep simply slam
the door in our faces. So we seek refuge in what we can
see and touch. The visible reassures ns. Ev ery thing we
can give a shape to reassures us. Even if that shape is
eccentric, it still comes from our hands, we have fash-
ioned it. What disturbs has no defined shape, no shape
we could reproduce however intelligently we tried; and
98
Th e S e c re t Lang u a g e of F i I m
yet we feel it move and breathe, kicking us, sometimes
biting us. Cinema, apparently intended for long descents
into all such chasms, in fact usually steers clear of them
—unless it confines itself to eliciting from them decora-
tive, surprising, or pleasing effects, After all, why not?
we say to ourselves. Why pound on that door which may
lead nowhere, and which in any ease no one has asked
us to open? We stay on the beaten track. We support
ourselves with both hands against the walls that both
hem us in and guide our steps. Cinema is still pushing
along this treacherous corridor, and perhaps will long go
on doing so.
All festivalgoers know this strange and somewhat dis-
turbing feeling: after sitting through two or three consec-
utive films, at the Cannes Festival lor example, we
emerge somewhat dazed, somewhat lost. The palm trees
on La Croisette, the sea, the strollers, all suddenly seem
singularly unreal. We have left true reality behind in the
auditorium, a confused welter of the images that survive
of the day s handful of films. Threatened with instant
oblivion, this daily-repeated chaos will nevertheless be
all our memories consent to harvest and hoard from this
day s viewing. We have not really been living. Seated in
the gloom, we have quit our bodies, our minds, and per-
haps even our souls; we have remained long separated
from ourselves, all in the interests of this imperious (but
already muddled) sequence of sounds and images that
have enveloped, drained, and destroyed us.
What happens in the course of one day also happens
over a longer period: a month, a year, a whole slice of
99
Jea n - C l a u d e C arriere
our lives. With the exception of outstanding films —
which we usually see again from time to time — most
melt into an ill -defined magma that is doubtless depos-
ited in some lazy area of our brain. There are films seen
in childhood and on vacation, films from student days,
films seen with our spouses, films seen in New York and
elsewhere: a private and personal system of classifica-
tion for each individual. In another book I have written
about my memories of films seen in a small garrison town
in Algeria in 1960, during what we then called ‘pacifica-
tion” and now call a war. For over a year I went to the
cinema there three times a week, and 1 recall only two
or three titles. The others have blurred together. They
constitute one single film, in which incoherence reigns.
Pirates, cowboys, and medieval knights mill in disorga-
nized combat. I can see galloping horses — but are they
off to storm a fort in New Mexico or a fortress in Mesopo-
tamia? 1 do not recall. The cinema— that cinema — de-
manded too much of my memory, which has now taken
its revenge.
What will remain to us of the endless tapestry of im-
ages unwinding before our eyes?
In diverse guises, the filmed image has launched a
methodical invasion which is meeting no resistance. The
most traditional of societies, those we used to consider
the best insulated, have no antidote to the videocassette.
They were seduced at the first caress. A colored picture
that moves and makes sounds: for them, as for us, it is
irresistible. Amazon Indians, still almost naked (except
for the missionary-mandated shorts), deftly operate
video cameras. In the market stalls of Africa and New r
100
The S e c ret L u n g u a g e of Fit m
Zealand, in the farthest recesses of Central Asia, all the
world s films are available. Even in Iran, where Ameri-
can products are almost uniformly forbidden, Hollywood
videocassettes are smuggled across the frontiers. An irre-
sistible invasion.
Is this deplorable? Or is it a good thing? I don’t
know. Nobody knows. But that is how it is, and nothing
will change it. Not at once, anyway. We can speculate
that the century may gradually jettison u seless images in
order to rediscover or discover something else. But it is
a hollow dream. For now, and for a long time to come,
the image has prevailed. For better and for worse.
Maybe this long river will flow on without drowning us,
like lustra! water, bringing in its passage only a distrac-
tion, a respite from a too-arduous existence, an isolated
moment, benign, soothing, and at once forgotten. Time
wasted, perhaps, but at least during that time no one lias
fought, no one has killed, no one has ill-used the earth.
The image lulls and paralyzes. There are those who
might prefer the other.
Perhaps the real danger in this saturation-by-image
that everyone is talking about (generally with alarm) lies
in the disappearance, pure and simple, of what we used
to consider reality. There is the danger that reiterated
images of the world will ultimately replace the world.
The danger that a popularized and universally dissemin-
ated cinema may cut us off, with no hope of return, f rom
whatever remains of reality. That in a world we know is
doomed to disappear (and perhaps sooner than we think)
we might find temporary refuge in representation of that
world. When all the trees are dead, a decorator friend
101
/ e a n - C l a u de C a rr i e re
recently told me, they will manufacture more in film stu-
dios, There, water will flow crystal -clear, and birds will
sing.
Three years ago I saw an ominous documentary on
TV. Patients from Chernobyl, Russians who had been
exposed to severe radiation, sat before a screen in a small
projection room. Their bodies were damaged, but so
were their minds. What lesions had they suffered? We
were not told. Perhaps no one knew.
As they sat there, expressions dull, heads lolling,
these motionless men were shown still-shots of nature,
nature in all its glory, blue, pine-fringed sea, tranquil
woodland, a cool mountain stream — a few of the won-
ders menaced by the catastrophe that had struck them
down. According to the voice-over, doctors hoped that
this visual stimulus might awaken what was still alive in
their brains.
Perhaps one day we will be like those diminished,
misshapen men, huddled for refuge in some shelter.
That time will come, and perhaps many alive today will
see it. But no need to worry: we will possess enough
information by then to remember the old life and build
facsimiles of it. We are already doing so. In some parts
of France they are already putting up fake villages, care-
fully reconstructing what was everyday life to me when
1 was a child, and people come to visit, to gape at this
object of curiosity. Not even one lifetime has gone by,
and already my childhood is in a museum. Which means
it has vanished.
There is the danger of losing touch with things and
people without anyone even noticing. The danger of
going more and more often and more and more median T
102
The Secret Language of Film
cally through the looking-glass to the place where there
are still tall trees (of painted cement, on studio lots) and
naked Indians (made-up, unionized extras).
There is the danger of finding this journey pleas-
ant and even exhilarating, since in that world (as the
old Kabyle woman failed to understand) even death is
artificial.
The danger of fleeing for a long time, perhaps with
no chance of getting back,
The danger, too, that by looking at this world of ours
we may cease to see it.
103
TIME DISSECTED
I n 1972 a retired Los Angeles film editor took me
into a cutting room to talk to me about his work,
which he loved above all other things. It was an unfor-
gettable day. This man had worked in Hollywood since
the 1920s, since the last years of silent film. He had been
intimately involved with the whole evolution of mon-
tage, of film’s inner rhythm — and of narrative flow,
which he said was moving faster and faster, as if time
were accelerating with the century, as ii the cinema, in-
creasingly breathless, were stricken with amounting and
inexplicable sense of urgency,
TLs like planes and cars/" he told me. “They have
to keep getting faster. Yet our heart and breathing rates
haven't changed, nor our digestion. Nor the rhythm of
days and nights, of tides, of seasons. Why do films move
taster and faster?
105
J e a n -Cl a tt d e C a r r i e re
He demonstrated the acceleration of the editing pro-
cess with films of different vintages. He showed me how
in the 1930s you never entered a building without first
showing a general view of it (an establishing shot), then
a long shot, with if possible a street sign indicating
where this was happening, then shots of entrance, stairs,
and corridor, before the character reached the person
waiting (or not waiting) for him. And he showed me how,
over the years, all these once-essential shots had gradu-
ally disappeared. He had even been asked by directors
or producers to work on old montage jobs, to shorten and
tauten them, give them a ‘modern look. He had done
his best, trying to understand why everyone considered
this acceleration inevitable,
l U showed me a few sequences, the earl iest of them
dating from the 1930s, designed to illustrate the meteoric
rise to glory of (for instance) a famous singer. Such films
typically strung together less than a minute s worth of
lively music and linked images; a train's wheels, posters
with the star s name in ever bigger letters, presses
churning out fat headlines, delirious audiences, bou-
quets, jewels* " They still haven’t improved on it/ he
told me*
He also showed me silent-movie sequences from
which, he believed, it would be impossible to cut a sin-
gle frame — films he considered eternally perfect, their
duration and tempo not subject to the dictates of time,
even if these films, for simple technical reasons, might
seem hurried and jumpy to us.
He wondered why the soundless images of the past
seemed to take shape and fall into place more naturally
and with greater rigor and inevitability than talking im-
106
Th e Secret L a n g u a g e of F i I rn
ages, as if the use of speech had introduced a hazier,
less polished, less incisive quality into film — perhaps
because this newfound facility made it possible to econ-
omize on the image, to tell instead of show.
And also because of the prestige and authority of the
spoken word*
“An editor shrinks from cutting a character who is
talking/ he told me. It s almost bad manners.
He added with a smile, “Particularly if he’s a star and
has a loud voice/
1 saw that man on two or three more occasions. He
particularly liked talking to me about time* But he had
no theoretical perspective on it. He discussed it like a
craftsman for whom the very raw material he shaped,
distorted, stretched, and shortened was time itself, the
inscrutable and inflexible master he nonetheless man-
aged to mold in his small, dim room*
Gently, lovingly, his hands manipulated the knobs
and levers on an editing table,
“No one ever sees diis work in a film/' he said* “This
is the one thing audiences must never see. It\s only
when it s not done, or badly done, that people notice it/
Among other examples, he spoke of gun fights in
Westerns i he spoke from a practical perspective, an ex-
perienced perspective. He told me that duels fought to
decide which adversary is the quicker trigger (pure
Western myth, without the slightest basis in historical
reality) are always filmed and edited according to the
same invisible model.
The two men (who have waited until the last reel
to stage this lethal encounter) walk slowly toward one
another, each trying to stare the other down, sometimes
10 7
/ e a n - C ( a u d e Carr i e re
exchanging taunts. Cautious bystanders look on. The
end is near. We have been expecting this moment for a
good hour and a half.
The two men — and we know one of them is living
his very last minute — are first shown either together in
an establishing shot (showing the two of them against a
wide background) or else one after the other; it matters
little which. All variations are admissible in this prelude
to doom. At the decisive moment, with our nervous sys-
tems clamoring for an end to it all, the two men stand
stock-still in the dust, hands twitching. Now in real life
(supposing such a situation were to arise in real life),
things would happen quite differently, for in real life the
one who hits or shoots first usually wins. But the cinema
plays another kind of game with time and with its old
companion, death. I say its old companion because no
other medium, not even the battle panoramas of the
nineteenth century, has slaughtered such great numbers
as the thousands of films we have seen.
Inevitably, the camera first shows the man destined
to die. He is the first to grab his gun; he draws and raises
the weapon to hip-height. All in one movement.
But he is not the one who wins. At that precise mo*
ment the camera switches to the other man, the faster
one, the one who is about to kill. He in turn grabs his
weapon, raises it, and fires without aiming.
He always hits the target. Depending on the needs
of the script, he can simply shoot his opponent 1 s gun
from his hand, or wound him (always in the shoulder),
or put him down for keeps with a shot through the heart.
With a last grimace, the man who drew first crumples
in the dust.
108
1'h e Secret La ngu a g e of F i f m
But if the loser’s gun was already in position to fire,
what on earth was he doing while his opponent was still
drawing? lit 1 quite simply stood there, six-shooter in
hand, for the whole duration of his opponent's shot not
firing, waiting for death. Time has literally been split in
two. Apparently in sequence, the two shots in reality
describe two actions that took place simultaneously, he
trickiest part, the old editor told me, was dragging this
fictitious time out to the maximum — we are speaking
here of tenths of a second— before our eye , once again
caught off guard, can transmit a critical signal to our
brains.
Those few instants the designated victim spends
waiting for death in this way can seem very brief. But
they arc not: they are a real fragment ol time, tune which
can be measured and dissected on the editing table.
Without coming remotely near the scientists' nanosec-
onds, which are not only imperceptible but virtually un-
imaginable fractions of time, editing makes possible a
highly refined relationship with time and duration. One
second on film is made up of twenty-four frames, and
editors tell you that in certain cases one frame, just one
frame more or less (that is, one twenty- fourth of a sec-
ond), can change the rhythm of a scene and almost
change the story it tells.
Here, clearly, we are in the realm of the invisible,
the imponderable — of what eludes the eye, of what ex-
ists but cannot be seen. Here film behaves like a profes-
sional conjuror, like a magician who uses his equipment
to show ns what he wants us to see and nothing else,
whose moves slow down only when it suits him, and
whose well-schooled hand is quicker than our eve.
/ e a a -Cl a u d e C a r r i e re
^ 3ji +
The games film plays with time are so many and so var-
ied that you could write a whole book on this topic alone*
Every medium adapts time — that concept which is inde-
finable yet without which no other concept could exist
—to its own needs and permutations* Fainting, sculp-
ture, and architecture play the game with a kind of
haughty immobility. Every work they generate is a pal-
pable act of defiance, even when it is a painting con-
cerned with only a brief moment of intimacy, with the
impression of a train moving swiftly through mist, with a
bird soaring in the evening air. Even when it is a canvas
claiming to be spontaneous, unbidden, leaping into life
without a moment's thought, without preparation. An act
of defiance, hurled by one small square of canvas into
the face t >f time, w ! \ i cl t takes away eve ryt \ i i n g, but wl i i eh
will carry oil this one-day wonder of a canvas a little less
swiftly than it takes us, than it takes the painter himself*
It is the Pyramids 1 defiance of the sands, the Mayas ot
the jungle. Van Gogh's of the revolving sum So many
acts of defiance* Our war against what erases, what shat-
ters and swallows up*
Some paintings, as if eager to marry time, to carve
themselves a niche (however small) in time rather than
deny it, seem intent on showing the development of an
action, on stretc hing out the duration of a painting, as in
the work of Breughel or Poussin, on juxtaposing images
which iu real life might succeed one another. They ar-
range perspective and light so that the beholder will
read the picture in a specific order. This can be order oi
importance, order of significance (from surface appear-
110
Th e S v v re t L a n g u a ge of F ilm
arice to deeper meaning), or even chronological order
("the action begins at top left . . By superimposing
several hours from the same day (with house windows
lamp] it but the sky still— or already — bright), Kene Ma-
gritte (among others) often opts to invent a nonexistent
time, a junibled-up time, a time which is his alone and
which forever protects the picture from normal aging.
There is also literary time, which comes in various
shapes and sizes, with comings and goings, long and
short hours, scenes (in Dostoyevsky, for example) with
dialogue much too long for the time the author assigns
it, with shortcuts, tricks, flashbacks, long introspective
pauses, with every imaginable dislocation, for words are
nimbler and more cunning than pictures. In some poetic
writings we even see time withdraw with a kind of ele-
gance, as if vanquished, paralyzed by an illusion, by an
intoxication too headv to resist.
The writers we consider great love to play with time.
Here again, perhaps, out of defiance: an attempt to mas-
ter the ponderousness of writing, of words dragging
themselves across the page, lagging far behind thought.
(Although sometimes, of course, the opposite occurs,
with words soaring into the blue and ideas plodding be-
hind.) In some Shakespeare plays a scene opens, charac-
ters appear, meet, talk, act, come and go, receive visitors,
and so forth. The scene ends without the principal char-
acters leaving our sight for a second; they have been
right there in front of us for ten or fifteen minutes of
continuous action, yet we suddenly realize that five
years have gone by. Indeed, we generally do not even
realize it. We are swept along by the action. We do not
have time to think. It takes the stubborn and fastidious
HI
Jeatt-CIaud e C a r r i e r e
vigilance oi scholars to catch what they insist is a major
error of Shakespeare’s (and indeed an obvious chrono-
logical impossibility does huk between the first and sec-
ond acts of Othello). If audiences are swept along
unheeding it means that despite the 'mistake/ or per-
haps even because of if the game Shakespeare plays
with time (of which he may or may not have been aware)
seems natural to us, Normal chronological logic yields
gracefully to the strength and emotional power of a dra-
matic situation.
If Shakespeare did realize his 'mistake,” 1 assume
he must at once have swept this down-to-earth objection
aside in the interests of higher theatrical imperatives.
He probably did not waste two minutes on such clock-
watching. He had better things to do. He preferred a
streak of lightning to the coziness of settled habit.
In The Tempest he even chose to do away with chro-
nology altogether, as if the action proper, which is in
truth very simple, were over even before it began, as if
Prospero had already decided to forgive his brother. In a
state of seeming befuddlement, the castaways stumble
ashore on an island ruled by spells. Despite the disaster,
their bodies and clothing are unharmed. As if at some
foppish court, they exchange absurd puns. They can sud-
denly fall asleep or wake up, with no night to compel
them. They glimpse divinities, vast palaces in the
clouds, a nymph, a banquet- — all of which will vanish.
Two of them move through events in a state of obvious
drunkenness, as if to enhance for us the sense of detach-
ment from things, the unreality that stamps the whole
play — which, ends with the word Tree.” The island is
112
Th e S e c re t L a n g u a g e of F i / m
truly free of space and time. Where are we? When are
we? All we can reply is that we are in a theatre*
Here the whole action is internal. We know only that
all the characters and Prosperu himself will finally have
to leave this fleetingly preserved island — just as the au-
dience will have to leave the theatre- and return to the
world, there to live more virtuously* The action is clearly
situated outside all the usual categories, in a secret, out-
of-the-way place, a place each one of us must unendingly
seek.
If the inner truth of the action is attained (and it
rarely is), all the usual contingencies are forgotten, par-
ticularly the everyday treatment of time. Playing with
time is a fascinating exercise, and one that should he
approached with caution, Peter Brook and I risked it on
several occasions, particularly in the Mahabharata, for
in any case theatrical space (which Peter has called "the
empty space") requires a particular time, a time within
"main time," which is itself an empty time, ready to ac-
commodate every shift. With it, a whole life can be con-
tained in a gesture. Sometimes the actors themselves did
not realize that several time periods were thus fused in
the same scene— like Magritte's different degrees of
light in one canvas* At such moments you could swear
breathing stops and hearts heat backward. A new kind of
time worms its fraudulent way into main time which,
once again, we are attempting to take by surprise. The
author— but with what degree of awareness? — thus ex-
presses a kind of personal defiance, of delight at this
display of his technical skill, and also perhaps of his au-
thority, his independence, his freedom.
113
} van -Cl an d e C a r r i e re
* + +
In an ordinary novel, in which the rules of time are scru-
pulously respected (the marquise went out at five in the
afternoon, not at any old hour), the game seems simpler
and ill a way easier. The author merely has to write
twenty yea rs later or a childhood scene suddenly came
hack to him for his obliging readers to jump forward or
hack, to zigzag, or to indulge an overlong dialogue with-
out noticing that it is too long — in other words, once
again to forget main time, which the clock-watchers say
is unchanging and common to us all, and which in this
case is the time it takes to read.
A very simple, perhaps overly simple, example may
help explain the beginnings of a difference in how liter-
ary time and film time are expressed. If in a novel I write-
next morning he left his house t I oblige the reader to no
effort. He scarcely notices what i have written. His eves
and brain, moving so to speak on automatic pilot, retain
only the few dements they need to follow the action
from that phrase; specific, functional elements, dispas-
sionately recorded, without in themselves possessing
emotional force or aesthetic sense, but which would
doubtless be missed if I omitted them. It is a question of
personal appreciation. Everything depends on what
came before arid what follows, Every writer can show a
character leaving his house one morning, if that action
seems useful to him. He can also decide not to. It is up
to him.
In any case the phrase is simple, unobtrusive, light.
Even its ordinariness can be forgiven.
In a film it is just as easy to show a man leaving , and
114
T h e S e c re t i a ng si a g e of F i l m
even a man leaving his house, if we already know where
he lives. In this case the short filmed scene will be just as
easy to grasp as the phrase in the hook, just as functional,
perhaps just as ordinary.
If we do not know where the character lives, if this
is the first time we have seen him leaving, we can have
him lock the door with a key, say goodbye to his family
or his dog, give a cheerful wave to the neighbors, show
he is familiar with
the area, All these identification marks
stem from the screenplay and staging. The challenge
(showing the man leaving his house) is simple. What is
harder is not to do it too emphatically, too insistently, too
heavily, not to waste precious time (in the word's true
sense) on it for time in the movies costs more than else-
where. The main thing is to conceal the information we
dispense behind vital, interesting action.
With a little digging it can be done.
But how do you show in film that it is next day and
morning? If you ask friends this Question, you are gener-
ally told {after the briefest of intervals for reflection) to
use a subtitle, This is not a solution to be rejected out of
hand — it has been used and is still used— but it involves
calling the written language to the rescue of the visual,
as it the latter were infirm. This process is often repug-
nant to filmmakers, who hold their independence dear. I
do not work in film, they say, in order to write on an
image what the image itself cannot say. My film is not an
illustrated book in reverse. It has its own language,
which I owe it to myself to use.
If we refuse to write on the image, or to have a voice-
over saying that it is morning, we can always hear a
rooster crow (but how do you explain the rooster's pres-
115
/ e an- C I a ud c C ’■ a rri ere
ence it the action takes place in the city?), see the sun
rising on the horizon (on condition that the day is fine,
and then of course it is awfully expensive to shoot very
early in the morning), see a garbage truck go past, chil-
dren trooping to school, a newspaper vendor, what have
you. The feel of morning — always supposing it is worth
the trouble — can be discreetly and unobtrusively recre-
ated, bothering nobody.
But next day ? How is that done? By filming a calen-
dar fixed to the wall and a page falling from it? The
mother of all cliches. Who would have the gall, unless
with satirical intent?
The idea of next day is always very difficult to con-
vey, for in film, days and nights do not move in regular
sequence as they do in life, They do not even approach
such a sequence. There are even film days, and film
nights , which divide time up in a unique way, a way
that belongs exclusively to cinema. You can move for
example from an interior — dining-room — day to an exte-
rior — battlefield— day, and so order it that the two
scenes following one another in the film similarly follow
one another in the supposed reality of the story. Narra-
tion time and film time are thus confused. Both scenes
take place on the same day.
But while preserving the same cinematic continuity,
these two scenes can also take place on two different
days in the story. The battlefield scene, just after the
dining- room shots, may be next day, next week, next
year, Or we may find that the battle had taken place in
an earlier year, or even an imaginary year. This battle
may be fantasy, dream, a second film within the film.
Given this apparently permanent potential for chaos,
116
T h e S ecr e t La nguug e o / F i I m
only a mysterious inner faculty, intimately linked to our
habit of watching films, allows us (most of the time) to
reestablish the chronological order desired by the au-
thors, The latter, of course, help us as best they can with
changes of lighting and costume, with breaks and re-
sumptions of the musical score (music that continues
from one scene to the next tends to unite both in the
same continuum). But the essential work is up to us. It is
highly likely that an inexperienced viewer, starved of
images since birth and suddenly asked to watch one of
today s films, would see nothing— even if he understood
the language — but a monstrous jumbling of time, just
as an extraterrestrial plunked down in a soccer stadium
would have absolutely no idea what was going on in the
game* Not knowing the rules, having no spectator habits,
he would presumably see every game as the same game
replayed over and over, whereas we know that from one
game to the next there are not two strictly identical sec-
onds to be seen.
As in a game, time sequence in film obeys certain
secret rules and even certain tricks, which no one is
eager to reveal* Woe to the film that lets audiences see
what makes it tick, that meticulously signals and slav-
ishly observes the passage of time. Such laborious servil-
ity is instantly apparent, promoting distinct discomfort
in spectators even when they are not sure why.
And glory to the film which, while observing the
rules, appears to be flouting them.
In the course of the nineteen years Luis Bunuel and
I worked together, we dreamed up a respectable middle-
class couple whose opinion we regularly invoked* They
were the average spectators, a pair of mild French eiti-
117
J e a m - C l a u d e ( ■ a rri e re
zens we called Henri and Georgette. At every tricky
scene we asked ourselves how they would react. Tilings
invariably reached the point at which Henri, weary of
too much boldness, of too much absurd or pointless ac-
tion, rose and said irritably, Come on. Georgette, we re
leaving, this isn't for us.
In most cases we strove to keep them in the theatre
to the bitter end, to think up things they might like, un-
derstand, accept, or tolerate despite unexpected behav-
ior or unconventional attitudes on-screen, particularly in
transitions from one scene to the next when time and
continuity itself were overturned. At every step, during
the improvisations that always accompany the writing of
a screenplay, Henri would lean over to Georgette (or
vice versa) and ask, “Where are we?' Is it the same day
or the next? Or is it a dream? What do you think, nut
cherie ?”
While it always seemed interesting, and even neces-
sary and healthy, to goad Henri and Georgette, to prod
them, to upset them, it seemed equally essentia! to keep
them in the theatre, to avoid pushing them over the
edge. Between the two courses the balance was, as al-
ways, delicate.
It is the same with the passage of time, that secret
bond without which no shared journey is possible. Time
is our common baggage, our vehicle, our road. To help
us on this journey, to provide useful landmarks, film-
makers use a certain number of processes copied straight
from what happens in life: makeup turns hair white, gaits
slow down, wrinkles set in as people age. Or else trees
have lost their leaves and it is already autumn.
Other techniques seem threatened with extinction,
118
Tfi e S e c ret Lttngtt a g e o f Fil ni
such as the dissolve and the fade-in, which ruled the
cinema for forty years and which some people, like that
Los Angeles editor, recall most fondly. The fade-in — a
temporary double exposure, of variable duration, of the
last frames of one shot and the first frames of the next —
always denoted a leap in time, but a short one. The dis-
solve — the gradual disappearance of one image which
swims into blackness and disappears completely before
another image arises out of that same blackness — invari-
ably signified a longer break.
But as early as the 1920s, adventurous directors were
already challenging this formal device. Among them was
Luis Buhuel in Un Chien Andalou, made in 1928. A char-
acter approaches a door and reaches for the handle. In
the next shot, which links up with it perfectly, his hand,
in close up, opens the door. Between these two shots,
which precisely succeed one another, Buhuel has in-
serted a fade-in. The two successive images melt into
one another in a curious disequilibrium — itself a feat
of acrobatics, a flourish, an act of braggadocio — as if
to smuggle a mysterious slice of time into an apparent
continuity.
Of all these processes, the most common and yet the
least obvious is the succession of days and nights.
About fifteen years ago a friend and 1 were leaving
an American Western; something about the way the story
was put together bothered us. You might say the film had
left us technically discontented. We chatted about it for
a while in a cafe without hitting on the reason for our
dissatisfaction. The next day 1 went back alone to sec the
film (whose title escapes me) and noticed that two night
scenes— campfire scenes in which the cowboys stretch
119
/ & a n - C I a u d e C a rr i e re
out around the fire, heads on the ir saddles, while Indians
prowl the darkness and villains pull hathrims down over
watchful eyes — were placed much too close to one an-
other in the story. The "film day" that separated them
lasted only two or three minutes.
This arrangement, miming in the face of nature,
broke the overall rhythm of the film at that juncture.
From that day on, I was always careful when writing a
screenplay to observe a uniform rhythm (as in real life)
in the succession of days and nights, to separate film
days (which may group several days into one) from film
nights (which as a rule are just one night) with more
or less equal intervals. Pure cheating, of course, but
strangely enough it corresponds to something real, per-
haps because we all live with rhythms — cosmic, sea-
sonal, respiratory, cardiac — which we do not even
notice.
We know our inner clock suffers if it jumps conti-
nents too abruptly; it can also trigger a version of jet lag
during a film if its rhythms are not respected. A slight,
almost imperceptible discomfort, the result of some un-
noticed lapse during the writing of the screenplay and
the editing. I mentioned this one day to the Polish direc-
tor Andrzej Wajda, with whom 1 was working on Danton ,
and lie shouted, Tt took me twenty years to find that
out!”
Which was about how long it had taken me.
The tempo of a film can be quick or slow. It can
also be choppy, staccato, or segmented, if that is what its
authors want. But they have to know that the tempo is
there, that it is infinitely stronger than we are, and that
we would be highly presumptuous to disregard it. You
120
The S e c re t L a n g a a g e of F i ( m
can show just one night in a film (preferably situated
around midpoint) or you can show a dozen, but the prin-
ciple, strangely, is unaltered; out there in the gloom of
the movie house we balk at chronological surprises, we
prefer a smooth tempo. The ancient terror of eclipses,
which seemed to change the course of the stars, lives on
in us.
But it is still a mystery — neither Wajda nor I had the
answer — why it is so hard to move without a beat from
one night to the next in film. Even a brief daylight inter-
lude almost always seems essential to both filmmakers
and filmgoers, even during the blackest of films noirs , It
is as if some fundamental immobility dwells in the heart
of the night, a resistance to movement, a sense of time
moving at a snail s pace, like the soothing drowsiness we
sometimes feel between bouts of sleep. There is a feel-
ing that the stars are not moving, that time itself is rest-
ing, that perhaps we are not growing old.
The image of a day between two nights — a street, a
hill, a scene in a train — is a trumpet blast, a jangling
alarm, a crowing rooster, jolting all our impulses into
wakefulness, all the energetic feelings which deep in-
side us look for sleep when the light fades.
Occasionally, as in Western gunfights, the cinema
stretches time out In thrillers, for example: a dagger
plunges toward a throat and— without recourse to slow
motion (almost always an aesthetic disaster), once again
by a simple editing trick, through a sequence of stag-
gered shots, the dagger never stopping its plunge nor the
throat its proffered sacrifice — time drags on and on and
121
J e a n - C l a u d e C a r r i e r e
sometimes seems to stand still to stimulate our sense of
anguished expectation. We catch our breath; time itself
hangs motionless.
But generally, and in an equally invisible way, cam-
era and editing speed time up and sometimes even ac-
celerate it. A naked woman starts to dress* She puts on a
bra. We leave her to focus on a man who is asking her a
question. We return to the woman for her answer, and
without any apparent leap in time she is already but-
toning her skirt, A second short exchange— a few words
from the man, a look from the woman — and she will be
almost ready.
Hard I v anyone notices this mysterious acceleration.
Everything happens as if the woman had dressed be-
tween shots, in a different temporal continuum from the
one we see. The needs of the story as laid out in the
screenplay — the female character has to be dressed by
the end of the scene — mandate this acrobatic separation,
this splitting of time. The question is no longer “What
was the gunfighter who drew first doing?"' blit “What
time warp did that woman get dressed in? 7
Similarly, skillful and carefully preplanned cutting
can show us the consumption of an entire meal in four
or five minutes. This is almost always the case. Meals
are invariably very brief in film, even when they are the
subject of the film, as in Bahette x Feast .
Taking a first nibble at her hors d 9 oeuvre or a first
spoonful of soup, the mistress of the house asks a ques-
tion, At this point we move to one of the guests, who is
already emptying his own soup plate as he answers her.
A second guest now joins the conversation (here again
122
Th e S e c ret Langu&g e of F ilm
without any obvious leap in time, so that the conversa-
tion appears to be unfolding normally) while already
helping himself to a piece of lobster. Now the mistress
of the house (with her own lobster almost polished off)
speaks up again— -which of course means another change
of shot — and then we are given a silent shot of the aged
aunt looking at the other diners as she helps herself to
leg of mutton. Another guest makes a remark as he pol-
ishes of the last bits of that same leg of mutton, and then
yet another guest — in another shot— moves on to the
next item on the menu* And so it goes. Very soon we are
ready for cheese and coffee.
Cloaked by the dialogue, the meal races by at top
speed. If the cutting is good, as it was in Babette *s Feast
(where the director's problems were made even more
difficult by the very fact that the meal was the subject of
the film, so that we all kept our eyes on it), and if dia-
logue or action is interesting enough to monopolize our
attention, we do not notice this anomaly. Physical action,
everyday action, whose tempo and duration are perfectly
familiar, yields to dramatic action. It gives way. Fiction
has wiped out reality, and once again we accept its
victory.
Many editors have wondered, and still wonder,
about these small technical mysteries, about the transac-
tions that occur at each change of shot between action,
dialogue, eye, and brain, not to mention our subcon-
scious, which doubtless shrinks at the idea of following
a long scene (such as a quickly boring meal) in real time.
Here again we are at the innermost sanctum of cinematic
narrative and form, at the point where nothing more can
123
J e a n - C / a u d e C a rr i e re
be said, unless we launch into a philosophical and (why
not?) metaphysical discussion— which would of course
explain nothing*
All we are seeing— or, thanks to editing, not seeing
— is a multitude of tiny subterfuges in the midst of what
appears to be reality, subterfuges which add up to make
a new kind of temporal continuity. Action moves faster
than film. Events, acts, words hide out between frames.
Eating or dressing scenes are obvious examples, as are
scenes of mountain climbing or swimming across rivers,
or the progress of a battle between two armies* But there
are other, subtler examples: a plane ride (sometimes just
a fe w s eco n ds ) , climbing s ta i rs , an e m < ) ti { >n ap p e a r i n g o n
a face, decision making, emotional metamorphosis. How
many times have we seen a man seize a woman in his
arms; she struggles, resists, screams, even hits him — and
then suddenly yields, is still? Her arms enfold the shoul-
ders of the man holding her, and soon their lips meet
The supreme cliche; we have all smiled at it. But if we
care to look closely we may instead recognize it for the
remarkable contraction it is: a sequence of events (which
in real life would have kept this man and woman busy
for weeks, even months) squeezed into less than half a
minute*
We are thus caught between the absurd and the bor-
ing, between the necessary but excessive simplification
of an action and a more faithful, and consequently more
elaborate, imitation of what we call (and have always
called) reality.
In the very heart of an action, of a scene, the increas-
ing tendency in cinema is to cut, often and boldly, to
leap directly from one phase in a scene to a later phase,
124
Th e S e ere t L a n g u a g e of F i l jii
still in the same physical setting and with the same char-
acters. The old need to narrate a scene continuously,
from start to finish, has withered away. Instead ot adher-
ing to what in the 1960s they called “real time” (al-
though no one ever knew what that meant, since no
action on film — itself a time-withirea-time — can possibly
be measured against reality), contemporary cinema
seems ever more dislocated, readier to skip from high
point to high point, without concerning itself toy much
with the logical continuity of a scene. The editing tech-
niques that astounded us thirty years ago in Joan-Luc
Godards Breathless (there was a long scene with two
people in a bedroom where he selected only those
moments that interested him, and simply juxtaposed
them) we now routinely expect to see in the majority of
films. The new language had been mastered relatively
quickly both by those who practiced it and those who
watched it
Editing and special effects are what currently domi-
nate filmmaking. This is of course the basic video style
we already mentioned: a dizzy proliferation of shots,
and jerky action that looks like the product of channel-
hopping. They seem designed to stop us from thinking
or understanding or even seeing, for fear perhaps of re-
vealing an immense void. In any case, this fashion indi-
cates that people are still intoxicated by technology. Who
knows whether this is a sign of youth or of premature
senility? In some films it is the contrary phenomenon
that comes close to astonishing us — the survival of tradi-
tional montage, the no-longer-needed walks down long
corridors. As for the moments of reflection, the hesi-
tations, when once upon a time (in the films of, say,
/ ean- C l a u d e C a t rier e
Michelangelo Antonioni or Theodores Angelopoulos)
we could follow every one of a character’s impulses or
ponder every possible bifurcation of action or feeling,
they are increasingly withheld. I often go back to the last
seq 1 i e nee i n S tai 1 1 ey Ku bri ck * s 2001 : A S pace Od yssey ,
one of film's most beautiful flirtations with time. It takes
place in a kind of four-star intergalactic hotel. Time itself
seems to be the main character, aging before out eyes;
wordless 1 y , w ith oi it exp lat i at i on, w i tl rout any oth e r
event to mar its dissolution. We are free to wander at
will: a true mystery. But all too often, through a tempo
insistent to the point of oppressiveness, we have one
vision, just one, forced upon us, and our chances of en-
tering the scene ourselves, of bringing to it some of our
own feelings or ideas, are increasingly threatened* di-
minished, rebuffed.
They are killing time. In film as elsewhere.
I sometimes wonder whether this more or less delib-
erate 1 destruction of time is not one of cinema s secret
obsessions: to eliminate time physically, obliterate it, to
build an illusion so powerful that audiences truly cease
to age and leave the cinema rejuvenated — or at least
feeling rejuvenated.
Doubtless this applies to the flashback, that wonder-
fully cinematic narrative technique much in fashion in
the 1940s. It first shows us something, happy or sad, hap-
pening in the present, then yanks us back into the past
to seek the origins of the present actions — as if we were
paddling back upstream on some causal waterway — be-
fore bringing us back once more for the end of the story
the film is telling. Time is thus truly denied. You can
indeed go back. Contrary to what the philosophers say,
126
Th e S e era t L an g u age of Film
the same water does flow twice. An hour and a half later
we find ourselves at our point of departure, which is now
our destination. A loop of time closes, time which has
been virtually preserved, as if immune from ordinary
aging. When we come out onto the sidewalk at the end
of the afternoon, we arc surprised to see night at hand
and the streetlights lit.
And then, at a single leap, we age. We catch up with
past, or lost, time. The illusion is rent asunder. It was all
a mistake. Someone has had the gal! to play with us,
make us believe in the impossible — with our permission
of course, with our help even. When Jean Cabin kills
himself in the first scene of Le Jour se leve, we know that
this is not the end of his story. They did not hire a big
star to have him vanish in the first few minutes. We will
certainly see him again, alive and kicking.
But we wilt no longer see him in the same way, since
we know he is walking toward death.
Thus the problem of time, or rather of cinematic du-
ration, which might have seemed merely technical or
aesthetic, almost inevitably ties in with other aspects of
the complex, indefinable relationship a filmmaker main-
tains with his audience (of which he too is a member).
Playing with time, whether you speed it up, slow it
down, cut and splice it, dissect it, or even forget it, is an
organic component of the language of film, a part of the
vocabulary, the syntax.
Nothing in this constant and constantly renewed re-
lationship is innocent. Nothing, not even naivete, and
still less clumsiness, More or less wakeful, more or less
dulled, we forge second by second an intimate, diverse,
sometimes contradictory contact with film. And time is
127
/ e a n -Cla u d e C a r r i e n:
the most important component of this contact. But it re-
mains unseen, like the wind shaking the trees.
Since its beginnings, film has taken an almost sensual
pleasure in reconstructing the past often with such ex-
treme care that you could be fooled— as long as the cam-
era remains unobtrusive. For even a hint of technical or
optical bravura in a scene set in the Middle Ages at once
alerts us to the filmmaker's presence, to the presence of
complex equipment, and the spell is broken. The dream
ol innocence remains elusive: we have seen too many
films and films about films and about the making of films
for some knowledge not to have stuck. Even with the
Knights of the Round Table or Jason and bis Argonauts,
if the panoramic shot is too clever or the zoom eiieet is
too labored, we at once sense the presence of a lull-scale
team complete with floodlights and sound equipment.
An anachronism unseen but felt l>v everyone to a degree
that depends on the state of his knowledge.
Details no one else had previously noticed can make
nonsense of historical scenes. During the first screenings
of The Return of Martin Guerre, which takes place in a
village in sixteenth-century southern France, we invited
the people of the region to view the film. Among them
was an old mountain herdsman who said it was his first
visit to the cinema, which seemed highly likely.
One thing worried him after the showing. Me told us
about it. When the villagers go to Toulouse, he said,
‘the cows there are Fries fans. There weren't any in
these parts at that time*”
128
1 h e S e e re t. La n g u a g e of V i l m
An insurmountable objection; and one, sure enough,
that justified his rejection of the whole film.
But I do not believe I have seen anything of this
kind to compare with an American film ol the 1950s, The
Prodigal Son, with Lana Turner and Edmund Purdom.
Vaguely biblical, this film showed among other things
the ancient custom of the harlots' wall, on which a man
would inscribe the sum he was willing to pay for a cer-
tain woman.
So Edmund Purdom, burning with love for Lana
Turner, approaches the wall, armed with hammer and
chisel, and begins to write. Naturally, so as to waste no
time, skillful cutting showed us the whole message al-
most at once and— in a masterly compromise between
producers and historical advisers — in cuneiform script
and in English we saw a piece of silver fok t am aka.
They could have opted not to show the inscription,
or found some other gimmick, or cut the scene. But film
is so besotted with the past that it has never balked at
toothsome incongruities of this kind. Remember Faulk-
ners laughter!
It is impossible to name a period of the past that has
failed to spark the cinema’s interest. Nothing eludes its
investigation of time gone by — not prehistory, nor the
Dark Ages, nor myth and legend, (It is just as curious
about its own past, now a century old. It is already re’
turning to its own childhood and youth, with a kind of
joyful nostalgia, even dwelling lovingly on its fumblings
and its mistakes,) The past is its territory. It resurrects
the past. It invents materials, fabrics, arms, gestures,
costumes, languages. It brings Vikings into the heart
129
J e a n - C I a u d e C a r r i e re
of Africa and takes Martians to Babylon, Maciste,
muscle bound hero of Italian ‘ ‘mythological” spectacu-
lars, meets and fights Hercules. Where exactly? And
when? Very hard to say. In any case the film throws in a
cruel sultan, tortured slaves, garish rebels, a glamorous
woman (scantily clad and given to wearing tiaras),
shaggy monsters, battlements, orgies, white horses, and
on occasion even firearms: a grand summing-up of our
history.
In these extraordinary journeys, which go from re-
motest prehistory to future ages, the game with time may
sometimes look naive, overdone, extraordinarily elumsv.
Historical fiction — telling the past as it might have been
— is one of the hardest forms to bring off for we look
upon history as a series of real and undisputed events.
Any questioning of what we think we know of om past
runs smack into our disbelief. It can also rub national
pride the wrong way: the past is often holy ground,
plowed once and for all. No sow ing of weeds, please, or
even of unfamiliar seeds.
Vet beyond naivete, error, or sacrilege, this irresist-
ible game with time gone by imparts a very special flavor
to our experience as spectators. A new dimension— fash-
ion — intrudes upon our relationship with the image.
That a given fashion can transform the past has long
been known, ever since the Romantics, for example, saw
and portrayed the Gothic period in their own way — som-
ber, skeletal, always nocturnal — even going so far as to
alter old monuments, as Viollet-le-Duc did with his
modifications to the roof of Notre-Dame in Paris,
In film the process is even more obvious. Every stage
in the life of film has imposed its own fashion on the
130
Th e $ e c re t Lang u a g e a f F i l m
historical era it depicts. These fashions come and go
quickly. The ancient Home of the 1920s is not at all the
same as the technicolor Rome of the 1950s. The present
changes the past, in film as elsewhere, but in film it
changes the past at great speed. We adapt that past, usu-
ally without even realizing it, to our taste, our habits, ou r
way of seeing, so much so that in the 1950s we consid-
ered the ancient Rome of the 1920s old hat; and 1950s
Rome, in turn, looks absurd and unwatehable to us now.
And it gets more complicated.
If today I view a Rene Clair silent film, An Italian
Straw Hat, inspired by a Labiche play of the nineteenth
century, I see a turn -of-the -century film, a film that looks
to me as if it was shot around 1900. Vet in fact the film
was made in 1928, and to make it, Rene Clair undertook
a thorough historical reconstruction, creating settings,
finding costumes, marshaling a fleet of hansom cabs—
labor that today escapes our notice. When we see the
film today, the twenty-five years between the filming and
the period the film depicts have mysteriously vanished.
An Italian Straw Hat has turned into a turn-of-the-
centnry film. The two periods have become confused. Or
perhaps we should say the three periods, to take into
account the period in which the original play first saw
the light of day.
And it is easy to see that in the future this blurring of
eras will intensify. Already, in a silent film of the 1920s
(an Italian or American “epic’ set in the ancient or Is-
lamic world, such as Ben Hur , Scipio the African , The
Thief of Baghdad ), every component — grainy texture,
black-and-white photography, silence, the jerky gait of
the characters (an instant sign of the past) — everything
131
] e a n -Claude C a rr i e re
seems to contribute to a strange synthesis, everything
seems to thrust the films into ever remoter pasts, until
finally they seem to have gone all the way back to the
very period they recreate.
If we possessed newsreels of those periods, shot by
cameramen accompanying the real Roman armies into
Africa, how would they differ from the images served up
in Sctpio the African?
Because of our mental laziness, our fascination with
the past and our propensity for daydreaming, abetted by
the rapid aging of 'technology, sequences from Scipio the
African showing elephants at the battle of Zaina and war
chariots attacking into a sandstorm have started to look
like sequences from a film shot in ancient Rome long
before the invention of film. There are times when I am
ready to swallow the whole thing, even the exaggerated
makeup and theatrical acting, Knowing that all these fe-
verishly busy characters are already dead, that the actors
and extras in the film (except for a handful of hundred-
year-olds) have already gone off to that vast domain
where the older dead await them, ! could easily believe
that it was the real Scipio standing there, giving his his-
toric commands — just as I can see the real General Rom-
mel, also in black and white, directing German troops on
the same African soil in the Second World War.
The deserts of the American West hav e been the setting
for manv biblical films. Moses and Solomon have crossed
r
California. Napoleon has been forced to retreat from
Moscow across Canada's snows. The African forest, with
or without Tamm, has often journeyed to Costa Rica or
132
Th e S e c re t Lang u a g e of F i ! m
Mexico. Popocatepetl lias occasionally stood in tor
Mount Fuji, while cowboys and Indians have clashed in
the bare hills of southern Spain.
Besides playing with time, cinema has also turned
geography upside down. It has costumed the planet in
every conceivable disguise. On several occasions scenes
set in Normandy have been filmed in South Africa
among similar meadows and similar cows. In Paris there
is a street — just one— where London scenes can be shot.
The houses on it, or at least down one side of it, are hui.lt
in the English style. I have also seen a whole London
neighborhood built in Mexico City; Moscow in Berlin;
Paris in Lisbon. In his adaptation of Kipling's The Man
Who Would Be King, John Iluston reconstructed India
and Afghanistan in Morocco, and filmed the Himalayas
in the Alps. Conversely, it was in Afghanistan that Peter
Brook made Meetings with Remarkable Men. He even
had tramped’ oeil pyramids built there.
There are no limits to this landscape-swapping. It
is generally resorted to for reasons of convenience and
economy, but some directors seem to delight in such
gymnastics for their own sake, with the illusion of space
an extension of the manipulation of time. It would take
endless digging to distinguish what is real from what is
not real in a film. But why bother? In any case, the planet
we recognize on the screen is not ours.
The cinema is a magic box in which transported space
and jumbled eras, shaken up together as if in a raffle
drum, finally mingle as a kind of single time past. This
of course presupposes the participation of our eye and
133
j e a n - C I a u d e C a rri e re
all our other senses. But well before the approach of the
millennium, we had been insisting that nothing outside
us exists with any certainty, that no image is real unless
we have decided it is.
I already have that feeling today. By tomorrow it will
no doubt be sharper, stronger. Let us leap a thousand
years ahead — an exercise cinema lias made almost famil-
iar. The time separating the film Scipio the African from
the ancient world will become relative, shrinking con-
stantly until one day it will utterly disappear, just as it
has done in An Italian Straw Hat
We already have historical examples of the phenom-
enon: the dark centuries in particular, those of the early
Middle Ages, have shrunk. Some centuries are markedly
shorter than others. And we confuse them with their
neighbors. We readily mistake a fourteenth -century hook
of hours for a picture of Caroiingian society. We speak of
a "pre-Columbian object without specifying its date (a
vague zone several millennia long) and even of a "pre-
historic tool" (several score millennia). Our sense of time
is so re 1 at i ve , so t i e d to the a ve ra ge d 1 1 rat i o n o f our pe r-
sonal passage on the planet, that we are profoundly inca-
pable of imagining a very long duration, of the kind
which paleontologists, for example, ascribe to the evolu-
tion of species.
Millions of years: these words mean nothing to us.
They are just words. We cannot begin to imagine what
they convey. That is why, as time flows relentlessly on,
we will one day have Greco- Roman films and Assyrian or
pre-Columbian films. Every period, whether it occurred
before or after the actual invention of cinema, will tend
to blur into other periods (except to scholars, who will
134
T 1 1 e S e c 'rat L a n gu age of Film
probably be few and far between, isolated, perhaps ill-
treated). And in the collective mind, which through
laziness and lack of imagination differentiates very
little between things, Mark Antony will have Marlon
Brando's features, followed by the surprise of seeing an-
other film with the same features given to Napoleon, so
that some will marvel at the resemblance between the
two great men.
For this to happen two conditions are necessary.
First, that people go on watching Marlon Brando's films.
There is no guarantee of this, And second, that no other
great actor of the future create equally admired por-
traits of Mark Antony and Napoleon, thus supplanting
Brando's performances, or bizarrely coexisting with
them.
But overriding both conditions is, of course, the as-
sumption that people in the future will go on watching
films. Here again, no guarantees. Moving and talking
pictures will certainly assume different forms, They are
already doing so; screens get wider, sound systems
change. Soon holographic theatre troupes will visit our
homes to put on the show of our choice; so will ballet
companies and wild-animal shows, and there will be
synthetically imaged naked dancers tolerant of our ca-
resses. It is almost certain, however regrettable it may
seem, that our techniques will age precisely because
they are techniques, that our color and even our Cine-
mascope films will one day seem as downright obsolete
as yesterday's black-and-white films now (alas) seem out-
dated to some.
This threat of imminent demise has hung over cin-
ema since the very beginning. When the Lumiere Broth-
135
J e a n -Cl a it cl e Carri e re
ers opened the first public cinema at the Grand Cafe
on the Parts boulevards on December 28, 1895, they
thought that their attraction would last through the holi-
day period, and perhaps even for a few years more, but
that people would quickly tire of it, the way you tire of a
toy. At its birth cinema already felt temporary. Or, to be
precise, film projected in an auditorium did.
We still feel that threat. Talk of crisis is always in
the air. Cinemas are closing, done in by disaffection and
speculation. Of course we see more and more films, but
we see them on television, or on cassettes. The American
market is still holding up — but for how much longer?
That is what they say, anyway, is it true or false?
Keen prophet has moments of weakness. For cinema
the millennium is always at hand. The end is always
near.
What will be left?
It can be argued that we filmmakers will no longer
interest anyone in the future but a handful of nostalgia
enthusiasts. They are already colorizing some of our
black-and-white masterpieces, Citizen Kane for exam-
ple, with the pathetic commercial aim of fobbing them
off in their electronic makeup as recent w orks. (The pit-
falls of newness’ have been around a long time: when
will we see Gova s engravings in color?) In the same
vein, they can be expected, unless we are vigilant, to
remodel, re edit, enhance, and similarly adulterate all our
old films.
Unless 1 am wrong. Which is entirely possible. We
are so often mistaken when we discuss what has not yet
happened. Besides, when it concerns form, all specula-
te
The Secret Language of Film
tion on the future is profoundly futile. Just as planting a
tree is an act without price, just as it is vital to fight the
good fight against those destroying the Earth and leaving
nothing for tomorrow, so it strikes me as irrelevant to
wonder what tomorrow’s films will he, what today's films
will be in the future. Nothing is so unpredictable as
the future. We do not make films today for twenty- first-
century viewers any more than we put Shakespeare on
for fifteenth-century spectators. Every form of expression
is contemporary. We work for those who share this mo-
ment of history with us. Here and now.
Tomorrow and elsewhere: what can we say about it?
Time, the sense of time, the very idea of time's flow, of
the possibility of change, of the existence of a past piling
up belli nd us, of a future opening up ahead — it is all too
recent an invention. We are not yet used to time, we
have not tamed it, not by a long chalk. Fourteenth-
century peasants, who saw Christ as having lived (more
or less) in their great-grandfather's lifetime, had tamed it
better than we have, in a world that scarcely changed,
yesterday was still within touching distance. Tomorrow
remained similar to today, with no hope of a single new
image — except, at certain periods, for Judgment Day.
At the beginning of the sixteenth century, abandon-
ing the ancient tradition of depicting the past with the
architecture and costumes of the present, they began to
paint Caiaphas, in gospel illustrations, wearing Jewish
garb and high priest’s headgear. So too for the Jews, the
Roman soldiers, and soon also for the knights of the
137
Jean- C / a u d e C a r r i e re.
Middle Ages. They were the first serious attempts at re-
construction, at historical realism. At first, time tiptoed
shyly in. but it soon waxed bolder.
In the same period — for the past is never unaccom-
panied by tile future- — Thomas More published his Uto-
pia, soon to be followed by a host of imaginative works
about a world to come, for better or worse: in any case a
different future, one we could dream of. Time had now
split apart to move both forward and back, and century
by century the fissure widened. Today it is vast. People
readily talk of the Big Bang — fifteen billion years ago
already — -and of the almost certain extinction (oh, the
pity of it!) of the galaxies. Our little life, as Shake-
speare called it, still rounded with the same sleep, has
now extended its dreams to the very brink of the infinite,
But while descriptions of future worlds invariably
stimulate the imagination, nothing ages so last as the
future, for the present is hot on its heels. The “errors of
anticipation are many and have been pointed out many
times. Countless authors have blown the world to smith-
ereens m order to play in the rubble, but few of them,
even in the twentieth century, ever dared predict the
demographic and ecological catastrophe which is ours.
And we would look in vain through novels from the
1930s and even the 1940s for references to plastics, water
shortages, desertification. The future generally remains
tailored to our immediate dimensions; we inflate our
petty problems to fit vast spaces.
So science fiction ages even faster in films than in
books, for it has to give visible shape and substance to
the future. It has to invent fashions for the future — -a
hopeless undertaking, since fashion lives only today.
138
Th e Sec re t L a n g u a g e a f b i ( m
And time and the depiction of time, like the depiction of
space, are subject to fashion. As we approach the millen-
nium we can look back on how the visionaries of the
1920s and 1930s imagined ns. And if some of those vi-
sions still dazzle us (Fritz Lang's Metropolis, for in-
stance, or Chaplin s Modern Times), others look terribly
sketchy, or mannered, or wrong. That future already be-
longs to the past, a past which today speaks to us only of
the past.
So however we imagine the future, whatever shapes
and colors we lend it, the pictures we create grow old.
And just as we cannot recognize the period we live in
from the silent black-and-white predictions of the 1920s,
in the same way all our images of today will tomorrow
be images of yesterday.
What is probable is that tomorrow, like today, the
past will quite simply expand. A constant stream of new
films will swell the number we already possess, creating
a situation so complex that all attempts at simplification
will necessarily be welcome.
Simplification and selection. And selection's chief
weapon is oblivion, time's old companion and ruthless
henchman.
A friend and I one day made a tally of the eight thou-
sand stage plays performed in Paris in the nineteenth
century* At a generous estimate, only forty or so are still
produced in France. They include a handful of “clas-
sics,'' The Lady of the Camellias t Cyrano de Bergerac,
Vhu Hoi , a few Hugos and Mussets and — the most fre-
q u e n tl y p e r f o rm e d o fall — a do zenc o n t e d i e s b y L ab i c h e .
Plus foreign plays from Goethe to Ibsen. Let us sav, to
he generous, eighty plays from all quarters*
139
/ e a n - C I a u de Carri ere
One out of a hundred. Not even one for each year of
the century.
At this brief remove of a hundred years, it is a grim
casualty rate. I imagine it is much the same for other
European countries. The attrition rate would be com-
parable, in fact probably worse, if we tallied the soap-
opera-style literature the Romantic Age gobbled so
greedily. Almost nothing is left of it. And everything sug-
gests that the same fate awaits us.
Admittedly, the nineteenth century did not have
television to extend the life of dramatic works, to keep
mediocrity determinedly alive. Yet even with our new
audience-reaching techniques, it is almost impossible to
imagine that the popular American TV series of the
1960s and 1970s, the exact equivalent of the last cen-
tury's melodramas, will still be watched fifty years from
now.
As for the films we admire and love, films we cannot
imagine vanishing from memory, they too will be cov-
ered over by oblivion, devoured, lost, destroyed. Al-
ready, many of yesterday s masterpieces are never seen
— unless we ask for them at film libraries. Many have
vanished or have been mutilated. From time to time in
the years ahead we will be offered “a film our grandpar-
ents loved as an object of curiosity.
And sometimes they will be remade to fit the fashion
of the day. All that is already being done.
In any case, it s of little importance. We don't work
for the future, for poor overworked posterity whose
tastes are a closed book to us, We work simply for obliv-
ion. Like Paul Hervieu and Georges de Portoriche, au-
thors illustrious a hundred years ago, we too will be
140
Th e Secret Language of Film
expunged. Other names will take our place, to be erased
m their turn.
We are all aware, too, that oblivion strikes more
quickly all the time. Films which misfire on opening
night, which are overtaken by events, by the success of
other films, by a wave of sour critical reaction or any
other kind of rejection phenomenon — such unfortunates
are strangled at birth, and almost never get a second
chance. In film it is now or never.
Another indicator: time moves forward fast, faster
than it used to, That Los Angeles film editor felt it No
one can tell us why.
Conversely, the image-as-reeord, the image-as-
archive, the image -as -hi story, long despised, now looks
as if it will last longer. History is going to need us. With
the inauguration in 1988 of the Paris Viddotheque, the
very first video library, we have entered an era of acces-
sible and proliferating archives. Every country, region,
institution, and big corporation will create its own audio-
visual archives. The movement is already well under
way, even fashionable, and the appearance of durable
numerical aids will further its development. In a few
years, tomorrow, it will obviously be very difficult to
teach the history of the twentieth century without re-
course to cinema and television images.
The whole century has been filmed, by amateurs,
journalists, war correspondents, spies. Political ad-
dresses, invasions, refugee flows, expeditions to far
countries, fights-of-th e-century, famous writers' remarks
— it has all been recorded and more or less well pre-
served. A broad and confused memory with ill-defined
frontiers is here and there dismembered and lost. It is a
141
J e a t i - C ( a u d e ( ■■ a r r i e r c
monster memory, which already poses vast problems of
adjustment, utilization, and above all interpretation. An
intrusive and probably necessary memory. Everything
suggests that eras to come will poke through our debris
and bitterly regret our carelessness, just as we already
regret that no one filmed or recorded Marcel Proust or
Franz Kafka, Although, when you think about it a little,
what sort of curiosity would that have satisfied? Media
hunger? Literary voyeurism? Are we really sure that our
contact with the works would have been improved?
Thus, having witnessed certain moments of history, the
filmed image will itself enter history. Having seen the
light of day in a century that has told the story of all
the c enturies, it will become history’s instrument and an
object of investigation.
When producers of certain TV programs use se-
quences from feature films, performed by actors, to
illustrate historical events, as if those scenes were core
temporary documents, viewers are told it is a film, a sim-
ulation. But our natural visual and mental indolence
soon overlooks such warnings, which are in any case
unobtrusive. Once again, we allow ourselves to be se-
duced and blinded by the image.
And the collective memory has the same shortcom-
ings as our own: it schematizes, it confuses, it distorts, it
forgets, just as we award ourselves the glory role in cer-
tain episodes of our life, finally believing in our own
lies, so whole peoples lie to themselves. They invent
for themselves nonexistent virtues and heroic behavior.
They w ipe away shameful episodes; they never instigate
142
Th e S e c re t l * a ng u a g e of t i / jh
disasters or wars. They celebrate illusory victories. Even
in the official history textbooks they let the historians
cheat. All peoples behave in this fashion, innocently and
knowingly. Concerning the battle of Poitiers — the fa-
mous eighth-century Frankish victory over the Arabs, a
centuries-old bedrock of France's sense of national supe-
riority and contempt for other races— a Sorbonne profes-
sor once confidentially told me: "We know now that the
battle of Poitiers didn’t happen. And if it did happen, it
didn’t happen at Poitiers. And if it happened somewhere
other than Poitiers, we lost it/’
If this is the case with historical truth, why shut the
door on fiction on die grounds that it would be necessar-
ily and irredeemably false?
Would-be reality and so-called fiction are moving
ever closer. And the phenomenon is not confined to cin-
ema, It has entered the mainstream of contemporary his-
torical research. In our ambiguous (and by definition,
impossible) attempt to make the past live again, or at
least to understand and restore it, the imaginary has be-
come as important an instrument as the actual event.
Reality no longer suffices for the writing of history. Facts
are dry and incomplete. We want to know what our pre-
decessors thought, the stuff of their desires, fantasies,
and dreams. So film, which strives to recreate not only
the forms but also the mindsets of the past (mindsets that
are, of course, un verifiable), has pride of place in this
new mosaic.
It is not only our past. It is also our way of looking at
the past, Scipio the African can already be seen as a
newsreel about ancient Rome, but it can also instruct us
about the beginnings of Fascist Italy, about the Duce s
143
J e a n - C l a tide C a r r i e re
fanatical dreams, about Ills secret designs on North Af-
rica, a land ripe for conquest
And so it goes; film enters history through all doors.
It remakes history, it helps recount the past, it becomes
history itself, Fellini s Sat y neon can be seen as a vision
showing us some distant planet but if you look carefully,
you will also see a film that is unmistakably about the
year 1968.
Besides, the future will mix everything up. The order
it imposes on the history books will be its own, and we
cannot guess what that will he. Authentic places or man-
ufactured sets, real streets or studio mockiips — in three
or four hundred years, who will know the difference?
Eric von Stroheim rebuilt Ins Tyrol, his castles, and Ins
Vienna in Hollywood, a whole precise world he bore
within himself, transformed, redesigned, perhaps more
real than the real one. Hitchcock did the same with the
deceptively placid setting of the English stately borne.
Perhaps one day their pretend films, their filmed simula-
tions, will be the only reality left of an age doomed to
oblivion.
Perhaps one day Joan the Woman ^ filmed in 1916 by
Cecil B. do Mi He on American soil, a continent of whose
existence Joan of Arc never dreamed, will be analyzed
as a historical document on the life and death oi France’s
Maid.
Perhaps Sommershy, an adaptation of The Return of
Martin Guerre , itself an adaptation of a true story, will
one day be seen as a film set in a small sixteenth-century
village in southern France whose peasants grow tobacco
with the help of black slaves at the end ol a long civil
war.
144
T h e S e c re t L a n g u age of F i I m
On the other hand, some films which we now prize
for the story they tell— crime, adventure, romance — or
for their emotional power, for the quality of their acting,
may in a few centuries he regarded as straight docu-
mentaries, background reports on cities or landscapes.
Perhaps the struggles waged in Elia Kazan's On the Wa-
terfront will interest nobody, and even Marlon Brando’s
name will be forgotten. However, a handful of students
of New York history or of twentieth-century social move-
ments may continue to pick over the film from the socio-
logical point of view*
As Eric Rohmer once wrote, ’A good film is also a
documentary/'
If we had been able to preserve filmed records,
archives, moving images, or sounds from certain
eighteenth- or nineteenth-century entertainments long
since consigned to oblivion, we might occasionally turn
to them nowadays with interest, with the slightly morbid
curiosity we bring to the parades of flickering ghosts
marching past us in old newsreels.
It would be as good a form of survival as any other.
Like a second shot at an afterlife. What we say may one
day seem boring, childish, or old hat, but we ourselves
will perhaps survive. Perhaps the ‘documentaries' we
unwittingly produce will one day be fought over by
small specialized groups of students.
But its all speculation. Indeed, at the first mention
of the passage of time, speculation and digression (which
time itself kindles and sweeps away) take over. Like
every other human activity, cinema is inextricably
locked into time, We occasionally try to rest by the road-
side, even to take a few steps to left or right or to the
145
J e a n - C l a d e C a rr i e re
rear. In vain. Impossible to stem the flow. We are like
the ant in the African proverb, swept away in the rushing
waters of a storm drain. “Very well/ he says, “I will
follow you, but only because you are the police!’
At least the cinema amuses, at least the cinema offers
the balm of oblivion, time s inseparable brother, to both
creator and audience. Like even art form, the cinema
plays a cunning hand against the great master. It marks
the cards, it bluffs. The halt it proposes is illusory, like
every halt, but it can be refreshing. It can also be rousing
and stimulating, for it forces us to wakefulness (in the
best of cases; in the others, oblivion is enough). As Hein-
rich Boll wrote, “Reality demands our active, not pas-
sive, attention. We could say exactly the same about
fiction. Active attention — in the very best of cases.
Otherw ise, we must be satisfied with boredom and
unsung toil.
Basically a technical process, even a merely mechan-
ical one, cinema has nevertheless explored the most del-
icate areas, the subtlest shades of feeling. Originally a
fairground attraction, it has nevertheless invented and
perfected a new and extraordinarily complex language.
Conceived for the purpose of depicting ‘reality, it nev-
ertheless maintains the strangest and most contradictory
relations with that same reality. Imprisoned (like all
things) within time, it nevertheless struggles to break
free of time. (And failing that, it uses its wits.) Finally,
born to the impermanence of the peeps how, it neverthe-
less struggles to endure, exorcising itself as best it can
every step of the way.
146
THE
VANISHING
SCREENPLAY
Y ou will occasionally hear an actor sav, "I’m
going to do this film, The screenplay isn't fabu-
lous, but my part s good. 1, who live by writing semen-
plays, have never quite understood what this means. I
am equally puzzled when friends who want to please me
say, “I really liked your screenplay. The dialogue was
wonderful, although the film wasn't all that good.”
I tad to see how you can dissociate a screenplay from
a film, appreciate them separately. 1 personally cannot
do it with other people's films. I can admire a camera-
man's (raining, or be embarrassed by an actor's perfor-
mance, but I either like or dislike a film as a whole, 1
have no real idea what kind of beast a well-directed but
badly written film might he. It would be a hybrid, almost
unimaginable creature. A film is always a thing in itself,
a more or less successfully executed whole, with disap-
147
/ e an- C I a u d e C a r r i e re
pointing or exciting parts. Inventive, passionate direc-
tion can sometimes breathe life into a commonplace
little story, That happens, Conversely, a mediocre or ar-
rogant director can hideously sabotage a good story. That
happens too, alas. But in that case the original screenplay
has disappeared, the victim of foul play; it no longer
exists. So how can we still say it s good?
In fact, a good screenplay is one that gives birth to a
good film. Once the film exists, the screenplay is no
more. It is probably the least visible component of the
finished work. It is the first incarnation of a film and
appears to be a self-contained whole. But it is fated to
undergo metamorphosis, to disappear, to melt into an-
other form, the final form.
1 was twenty-five and had just published a first novel
when my publisher, Robert Laffbnt, knowing I was inter-
ested in film, suggested that I enter a curious contest. He
had just signed a contract with Jacques Tati to publish
two books based on Tati's films, Monsieur Hulot s Holi-
day and My Uncle (the latter being then in the throes of
shooting). Tati had suggested that Laffbnt ask several of
his younger authors to write one chapter each ol Mon-
sieur Hulot’s Holiday. After which Tati himself would
choose the storyteller.
I agreed, and won — tints deciding, although I didn’t
yet know it, the course of my life, Jacques Tati chose mv
chapter, which 1 had written in the first person, speaking
through the mouth of one of the film s characters, a dap-
pci old gent who continually strolls the town with his
wife, his hands folded behind his back, spending three
or four boring weeks each year this way: a man whose
148
Th e S c c re t Langttag e of F i l m
holiday is about to be turned upside-down by Monsieur
Hulot.
Tati suggested we meet in his office off the Champs-
Ely sees. 1 entered with pounding heart. For the very
first time in my life I was in a production company’s
premises. This man whom 1 admired so much ushered
me in. He spoke little, but the gaze he directed at me
was piercing. First he asked what I knew about film. I
said I loved it more than anything in the world, that I
went to the Cinematheque three times a week, that I . . .
He raised a hand.
"No, what I mean is, what exactly do you know about
films? About how films are made?
I answered truthfully that I knew almost nothing.
"You have never worked in films?'
No, sir.
He at once called his editor, Suzanne Baron (with
whom I would later work on several films, including
Volker Schlondorff s The Tin Dram), and said to her, “Su-
zanne, take this young man and show him what film is.”
With unerring instinct, in the space of three or four
minutes, Tati had just given me my first great lesson; to
handle film, from whatever angle — even if it is only to
write a book based on a film — you must know how films
are made; you must know, and preferably master, the
techniques of film. You cannot assume, with literary
aloofness, that you have no need to know about this
hodgepodge of specialized equipment and cottage-
industry skills.
On the contrary. You must master these skills, live
with them, grapple with them.
!49
J e an -Claude C a r r i ere
That same day Suzanne Baron took me into an edit-
ing room in the building and sat me down in front of a
mysterious machine called a Moviola. She took the first
reel of Monsieur Hulofs tiolklai / and fitted it into the
machine. She switched on a bulb somewhere. Pictures
began appearing on the tiny screen in front of me. Then,
by manipulating a metal lever, Suzanne showed me how
you could move the film forward, backward, stop it on a
single frame, speed it up or slow it down. A little magic
lever, and my first game with time.
When the equipment was in place, Suzanne put a
screenplay of the movie on the table beside me, and
uttered a simple, unforgettable phrase, which was my
second big lesson of the day.
She put one hand on the screenplay, the other on the
reel of film, and said, “The whole problem is to go from
this to this/’
The whole problem. You could take those words as a
rather commonplace remark, but in fact they contain the
whole huge secret of the transition. They clearly state
the essential: that making a film is truly a work of al-
chemy, of transmuting paper into film. Transmutation.
Tran sfi > rrn i ng matter i tse 1 f.
Everyone knows that when shooting is over, screen-
plays generally end up in studio wastebaskets. They are
discarded, quickly done away with; they have turned
into something else; they no longer have any kind of
existence. 1 have often compared this metamorphosis to
die caterpillar’ s transformation into a butterfly. The cat-
erpillar's body already contains all the cells and all the
colors of the butterfly. It is the potential butterfly. But it
150
Th e S e c re t L a n g u a g e of l i I m
cannot fly. Yet the urge to fly is deeply buried in its most
secret essence.
The screenplay is not the last stage of a literary jour-
ney, It is the first stage of a film, Jacques Tati and
Suzanne Baron taught me that in a matter of minutes
thirty-five years ago, and each day s experience confirms
it. A screenwriter has to be much more a filmmaker than
a novelist. Of course knowing how to write does no
harm, but writing tor film is a specific and quite difficult
exercise that resembles no other. The screenwriter must
bear in mind at all times, and with almost obsessive in-
sistence, that what he is writing is fated to disappear,
that a necessary metamorphosis awaits it
Of all writing, a screenplay is the one doomed to the
smallest readership: at most, a hundred people. And
each of those readers will consult it for his own particu-
lar, professional ends. Actors will often see in it only
their own part (what is known as the ' selfish reading ).
Producers and distributors will look only for signs of its
potential success. The production manager will count
the number of extras, of night shoots. The sound engi-
neer will be hearing the film as he turns the pages, while
the head cameraman will be seeing the lighting, and so
on. A whole series of special readings. It is an instru-
ment, which is read, annotated, dissected — and dis-
carded, I am well aware that some collectors keep them,
and that sometimes they are even published, but that’s
only if the film works. Then they live on in its slipstream.
Writing lor film seems to me the most difficult writ-
ing of all, because it requires a convergence of rarely
assembled qualities. You need talent, of course, the gift
151
Je a n - C / a u d e C a r r i e re
of invention. You need ingenuity, empathy, tenacity,
You need a minimum of literarv ability and sometimes
■r -f
even skill. You need a particular feeling for dialogue and
a respectable technical baggage. As Tati said, you have
to know how films are made. Otherwise you write in
the void, in an ivory tower, and your writing, however
elegant, will remain untranslatable. And you have to
know what the things you write will cost.
In addition to facing these constraints, this obligatory
passage through the hands of actors and technicians, you
have to possess a particular quality which is difficult
both to achieve and to maintain; a certain humility. Not
only because the film wi ll most often belong to the direc-
tor, and his name alone will be glorified (or vilified), but
also because the thumbed and dog-eared written work
will finally be tossed aside like the caterpillar's skin,
Somewhere along the way the screenwriter must be able
to switch allegiances, transfer all his love to the film. So
as he leaves the studio on the last day of shooting, he
must he able to look at the wastebaskets without a hint
oi bitterness.
Tati and Suzanne kept me more than ten days in that
dim room, ten days which I now think of as my coming
of age. They showed me shots and reverse shots, estab-
lishing shots, different ways of centering, good and bad
link shots. I learned the first echoes of a brand-new lan-
guage. They talked about tempo and about style. A slen-
der, lively young man with big glittering eyes often
dropped in. He was Tati’s assistant but also his gag-
writer, musician, and magician. His name was Pierre
152
T h e S e c re t La n g u a g e of t i l m
Etaix, It was with him that I would make my real start in
film a lew years later. We have never parted,
Pierre sat beside me and tried to answer my naive
questions. Why was this particular shot not exactly as it
was described in the screenplay? For all kinds of unfore-
seeable reasons , Pierre said: a jetty (this was in Monsieur
Hu lot ) might be too short, an actor was having trouble
coordinating his moves (which in comedy have to be
super-precise), there was bad weather, a temperamental
dog— all the hazards of shooting — or else the sudden
realization that what made you laugh on paper turns
heavy, or unbelievable, or seems telegraphed, when you
try to give it shape and life for the camera.
These are accidents of passage. They are unavoid-
able. No matter what precautions you take, despite care-
ful preparation, improvisations, amendments, rehearsals,
there are certain moments (the only word I can find)
which refuse to become parts of a film. You can of course
try to force them, to manhandle them into the picture.
They submit reluctantly, always leaving behind some
sense of dissatisfaction in filmmakers and audiences.
Why is it that what seems right and proper when you
read it, even when you read it aloud, becomes false and
forced when you see it filmed? Is it the passage from our
subjectivity as readers, in which the shapes we imagine
necessarily remain vague, to the implacable objectivity
of film, whose eye and whose heart are different from
ours? Are we struggling with something irreducible
here?
Every director has encountered this resistance, this
recalcitrance. It is as if the scene, or a moment within a
scene, digs in its heels like a rebellious mule. Despite
153
I can - C I a it de C a rri e re
all our tricks, this damned moment will not become part
of the film.
Actors often feel it instinctively. They say, ' I have a
problem with this/ They cannot define it too clearly,
but at every attempt to dive into the scene they stumble.
They are not at ease; they fake it.
For the alert director this is a danger signal. Careful:
something is wrong- And he must resolve the perennial
problem: should he compel the actor to conquer this re-
sistance — and perhaps find a second truth beyond all his
soul-searching — or should he at once modify the scene,
even eliminate it?
Every metamorphosis of a screenplay, that is, every
filming of situations dreamed up by the screenwriter,
thus comes festooned with compromises that the writer
hopes will be minor, A screenplay is always the dream
of a film. You dream up the finest performers, the most
beautiful settings, rivers of dollars, truly new images.
When it comes time to shoot, which is the first mo-
ment of truth (the other such moment will be the day of
release), you almost always have to make do with what
is at hand. The compromises begin, hi fact, they have
already begun in the preparatory stages: So-and-So is not
available; there is not enough money to shoot the ocean-
liner scene; no question of sending a crew to this or that
country after the latest developments there; and, always,
the pressure of time. They say that during the filming of
Les Enfants du Paradis at the Yictorine studios in Nice
in 1944, Marcel Came went into tantrums over American
warplanes supporting the Allied landings in Provence.
“Can’t you go somewhere else? the director veiled at
the aircraft, "We re trying to make a film!"
154
The Secret Language of Film
Leaving aside such cases of the unexpected, compro-
mises crowd in as soon as preparation begins. I often
think that one of a director's prime gifts is the ability
to choose among compromises: those he can live with,
however reluctantly, in order to save the film; those that
will have to be fought every inch of the way; and the
ones he has to refuse no matter what.
The metamorphosis can sometimes reach absurd lev-
els. I recall, in the 1960s, a director who decided to make
a film based on the life of a desert monk, one of those
saintly hermits whose miraculous deeds are a part of
early Christian legend. He convinced a producer, who
hired a screenwriter, and they went to work.
But after a few weeks they wondered: why should
we keep this beautiful story locked away in ancient
times? Couldn't we bring it closer to us, set it in the
seventeenth century, for example? And why not in mod-
ern times, for that matter?
Of course, there are no longer miracle-working saints
in modern times — not in the West, at any rate. Then
could the story be set in India, in Africa, in South
America perhaps? Here the producer had his own views.
Not a chance of shooting in Africa or India. Audiences
would not identify with an exotic character. No, the film
must be made in Europe. Otherwise, there would be no
film. (It is always this way; you are never given the
choice between this film and another one which might
be better; you have a choice of this film or no film at alb)
Fine. Where could a saint be found in Europe in the
1960s? Discussions dragged on for nearly a year before
bearing fruit. It was decided that the nearest modern
equivalent to a saint of Christianity's heroic period was a
155
/ e a n - ( ] la u d e C a r r i e re
private eye. No doubt about that. Producer, screenwriter,
and director were agreed. Thus did an original and per-
haps harebrained idea (a saint! what kind of sense did
that make?) collapse eozily and flaccidly into the weari-
est of all cinema cliches.
They made the film. A thriller set in Madrid, with
Eddie Constantine in the lead role, 1 have to admit that
the director who had proposed his farfetched idea a year
earlier withdrew at the last moment. Someone else made
the film. A mediocre film, a flop.
A few days after our first meeting, Jacques Tati took me
to a recording studio. He was personally handling the
sound effects for My Uncle. That afternoon he had to find
tire sound of a glass shattering on the Boor of a modern
kitchen. A thorough man, Tati had walled himself in be-
hind a good thirty cases of glasses of varying quality, and
for hours, one after the other, with the utmost gravity, lie
dropped these glasses on different types of floor — stone,
wood, cement, tile, even metal. I watched him amazed,
wondering if this long, boring, unsung work was what
the cinema was supposed to be about, I followed Tati
more or less everywhere, usually with Etaix, attending
projections followed by long anxious discussions, f Can
we clearly see the dog's tail go past the electric eye that
shuts the garage door? Yes? Clearly? You re sure people
will see it?”) He doubtless sensed that he should show
me as much as possible before letting me write the book.
From this comes the importance 1 have always accorded
technical skill, the hardware of filming; sounds, lights,
editing work. Starting out with only literary training, 1
The Se ere t L a n g u a ge of F i / m
have tried over the years to spend as much working time
as possible on sets and in movie houses and laboratories.
Throughout the shooting of Pierre Etaix’s first film. The
Suitor , I was prop man and boom operator. We were
hardly overfinanced; indeed we were a skeleton crew.
But taking the sound as you follow a production, slip-
ping the boom in among the lights without throwing
shadows on the walls, giving an edge (even a slight one)
to this or that sound, this or that voice, is all a part of the
overall work. None of it is irrelevant to the writing. Even
today, I spend as many hours as I can in research work-
shops. I ask to be initiated into the mysteries of synthetic
imaging, holograms, all the latest extensions of the lan-
guage of film.
In the approach to every technique, even the latest
digital ones, there is an ancient secret. Every apprentice-
ship is a total process, changing not only our gestures
and our ways of seeing but probably our whole being- A
precise craftsman rarely harbors crazy ideas, lie remains
calm and sure of touch, even when awav from his work.
For us the real danger- — -and it often arises — would lie in
believing that technique is enough, that virtuosity can
supplant ideas.
Doubtless the opposite is true. The older I get the
more I admire artists who conceal their technical prow-
ess- — like Renoir, Runnel, Yasujiro Ozu — who carefully
avoid effect, shun purple passages. That they are capable
ol every kind of virtuosity 1 do not doubt Rut I like it
when they aim for something else, a mystery, an essence,
an enhancement of life, a less str iking but rarer quality.
I am not attracted either by over-obvious painters
(even though their work sometimes sets obscene records
157
/ e a n - C l a u d e C a rr i e re
at public auctions) who flaunt their effects and often re-
peat themselves*
I like these words by Delacroix:
"If one lived a hundred years one would prefer Ti-
tian to all others. He is not the painter for young people.
He is the least mannered and consequently the most
varied of painters. * . . The least mannered artist has to
be the most varied: he constantly defers to genuine emo-
tion. Hr has to render that emotion. Embellishment and
a vain show of facility or skill do not interest him. On the
contrary, he disdains everything that does not lead him
to a livelier expression of his thought/’
In a screenplay, as elsewhere, you must be wary of
technique, which can so quickly turn into mere fluency.
You have to push forever further, toward “genuine emo-
tion," Early on, with Tati and Etaix, 1 noticed that a large
part of the function called writing consists precisely in
not writing* The very act of writing is dangerous, for it
carries with it a kind of time-honored prestige which is
very often its only justification. It is written, therefore it
is true; therefore I will do nothing more to it. When a
screenplay is finished, many filmmakers call it "The
Bible,” as if it were Holy Writ*
And I have often noticed, during play rehearsals for
instance, that if you give an actor a line orally, without
writing it down, he treats it casually and often with fer-
tile inventiveness* If you write the same line on a piece
of paper, or better still type it T the actor at once respects
it. It may even paralyze him*
When we left the studios, Tati would sit with me at a
cafe terrace and we would watch passers by. Most didn’t
really catch our eye. But suddenly someone would ap-
158
T h e S ec ret f , a n g nag e o f F i f m
pear, riveting ns with some detail; a look, something spe-
cial about clothes or body. This was our return to the
source* You have to watch and see , and at once start
imagining, move from passive to active, try to hang upon
t h i s c h a n c e e n c o t m t er a s t ory , a j ok e , a m i s h a p , a n acc i -
dent that seems to fit that person. The whole street,
the city, and — why not? — the wide world and all the
planet's inhabitants seemed to exist just to give us the
excuse for an immense comic film it was our business to
discover.
I have long pursued this 'work — looking upon the
world as a pretext for films — hi all its different guises,
with Pierre Etaix, Luis Runnel, Milos Forman, and Peter
Brook, among others. Of course, each of us sees only
what suits his taste or interest. A man with a limp may
seem funny or pitiful, depending on your eye* 1 recall
Milos Forman on a cafe terrace, watching the coining
and going of passersby and prostitutes at a Pigalle inter-
section and muttering disconsolately, 'Only God could
have directed this!” The essential thing is never to aban-
don contact with real life in favor of a cerebral construct.
You must start out by exploring and taming what is
around you before starting to impart all the necessary
twists and turns to reality.
In 1968, Milos Forman decided to make a film in
New York. As his leading character he chose a voting
runaway, a social dropout. There were many such run-
aways in those days, kids who suddenly left their dull
Tamil ies to join garish gypsy bands of hippies in the
streets of the East Village, seeking another life, a better
life. The Beatles had just written a wonderful song on
die theme, 'She's Leaving Home*”
159
J e a n - C l a u cl e C a r r i e re
Mil os asked me to work with him. I joined him in
New York, which both of us were seeing for the first
time. When you first arrive in the United States your
reaction is always the same: “I know this country!” We
have all seen and loved so many American films in our
lives that everything is familiar — -skyscrapers, Colorado,
New York's yellow cabs, even the wail of police sirens.
Our first visits to America all took place in movie houses.
When you actually visit, of course, some adjustments
are necessary. New York in 1968 had surprises in store.
Unprepared for the new ways, Milos and 1 were stran-
gers in a land we found strange.
To acclimatize ourselves, we decided to live right in
among our characters in Greenwich Village instead of
shutting ourselves in some hotel room to ’ ‘write this
film, which was called Taking Off. We walked around,
ringing apartment doorbells at random, saying in our
horrible accents, “We are two European filmmakers; we
want to make a film about young Americans, Do you
have children?”
No one slammed the door in our faces. Once a family
even shared its meal with us. And the door of our little
rental house on Leroy Street was always open to all com-
ers. We listened for hours to their stories, which we ini-
tially had trouble understanding because of the kind of
English they used, a tribal jargon designed for the exclu-
sive use of group members (in fact, several scenes in
the British version of the movie were subtitled so that
English audiences would understand them).
The screenplay came only later, much later, after
lengthy real-life immersion. In the end, most ol the film’s
scenes were made up, like the one depicting an “Associ-
160
The Sec r e t L a n g u a g e * >f F i f m
ation of Parents of Runaway Children,” which was so
realistic that the producers received letters asking for the
organization s address. But the invention was rooted in
real life. It could never have existed without the excep-
tional cast of heart and mind that marked that period,
and without our own intimate, persistent, anthropologi-
cal approach,
It is best for the writing to come last, when the essen-
tial has already been found. As late as possible.
The second phenomenon to emerge (along with a certain
hesitant surprise, which over die years takes on many
forms but never ceases to be a surprise) is the growth of
the imagination* The imagination is a real muscle, which
like memory is strengthened by exercise. Rut unlike
memory, which we believe — or did believe until re-
cently— to be located in a particular area of the brain, no
one is sure precisely where the imagination holds court.
It is in the head, of course, but also in the body, the
senses, the nerves, the reflexes. There it is, more or less
lively, depending on age and character, wanting only to
unfold, to spread, to bloom. It lives in us under the most
mysterious guises; it makes our dreams and our day-
dreams its own; it is the wind swelling our sails, it is our
life transformed.
We all know that we imagine. If we didn't, our lives
would be too real. As soon as life's hubbub dies down,
even il only for a few minutes, we rediscover this secret
companion. Our imagination takes the helm, moving in
subtly and gently, taking advantage of this momentary
inaction, this return to self, to raise the invisible curtains
161
/ e a n-Cl a u d e C a rri e re
within us. it sets us down before a stage on which an
actor stands. That actor is ourselves. Stage and audito-
rium are one. Building on bits and pieces of reality > of
what we encounter every day, of our friends, of men or
women we desire, we enter another world,
Trying to look casual, some of us press on a little
farther and try to make others share the pictures, sounds,
and stories that flow through us. Calling ourselves pro-
fessional storytellers, we organize the errant, day-
dreaming part of" ourselves, put it to work, manhandle
and harry it: treatment it both loathes and loves.
As experience succeeds experience, we become
aware of this tenant. Fairly soon — a first reason for sur-
prise — we see that its possibilities for exploration seem
limitless. Its territory is unimaginably vast and grows
daily. The number of situations which the imagination —
an untrammeled imagination — can conceive of may well
approach a notional infinite, Details, looks, movements,
words: no limits. In the nineteenth century some people
believed there was a finite number of dramatic situa-
tions, At most a few dozen. Nothing could be less accu-
rate than this narrowly arithmetical view of our
imaginary world. Everything can be drama, action, story,
romance, as long as interest is maintained and our listen-
ers sit wide-eyed instead of fleeing.
Many arc the seeds planted over the years in our
furrows. The storytellers of Africa, India, and Persia are
truly inexhaustible. But from time to time, particularly
in France, home-grown tyrants of reduct ionism have
arisen, axe in hand, to declare: this is how you must
write. This way, and no other. They have burned poets
at the stake. In seventeenth-century France, for example.
162
T h e 5 e c re t La n g u a g e o f F i l m
classical order advanced step by step with absolute mon-
archy to fall pitilessly upon the delectable, baroque,
priceless, mystical, and obscene poetic blossoming of
the first third of the century. Upon poets named Chaus-
son } or Le Petit
Enough of this calamitous disorder, say the tyrants.
We must now respect the Tides, express ourselves
clearly. Only propriety counts. Let us yet again reduce,
with the connivance of good taste. The result was that
for the whole of the next century, the eighteenth, no one
wrote a single poem in France, Mountains of verse, but
not one poem.
This danger, always the same although in different
forms, permanently threatens us. We arc? all of us, what-
ever our occupation, drawn to filing cabinets, pigeon-
holes, labels, drawers. What could be safer than to duck
down the first little side street, so sheltered, so cozy, so
easy to get to know? What could be safer than estab-
lished forms (which we are pleased to call classicism)?
We have said nothing yet and already we are beginning
to repeat ourselves.
We make lots of films; maybe we no longer create
cinema at all. We have lost the spirit of invention, the
spirit of adventure. When a vague reproach from our
shadow regions annoys us, we justify ourselves with one
word: fidelity. We say and believe that we are faithful to
ourselves. Yet fidelity is a word like so many others; it
means precisely nothing, at least when you use it on its
own. Fidelity to what? By remaining faithful to form, we
often betray essence. And even form will die later, long
since drained of all substance.
We have only imagination to rescue us from oblivion,
163
/ ean-C lau d e C a rrie re
to haul us out of our rut. Without our knowing it, it is
always there, returning again and again to the attack,
and with unfailing grace. How could we stop imagining?
Imagination carries us effortlessly through every look*
ing-glass; it sings with a siren voice. At every step it
is there to help us Hee the monotonous loop of things
already seen and heard, ot expertise, of dangerous ex-
perience. It opens up unsuspected paths through the
undergrowth*
Naturally it is sometimes frightened, for it is under
constant threat. Since it can dream up anything, turn the
world upside down, put the beggar on the throne and
boot the king into a ditch, since it can even dream up
apocalypse* the end of all things, supreme nothingness,
imagination is hedged about with mistrust. So it is ill*
treated, locked up. Regularly thwarted, it often shrinks
back into the darkest depths of its lair. In some people—
we have only to look around us — it seems to have disap-
peared, to have been murdered by routine and by fear.
So many people are forever locked into rigid living, into
closed thinking.
No doubt the great danger, in the screenwriter's field
as in others, is believing that expertise is enough, But
the truth is that he has to provoke it constantly, upset it,
work on each film as if it were his first.
Runnel read the paper every day He read it for news of
the world, which interested him; and he read it to hear
about our work. Reading and commenting on the press
was part and parcel of our research for a screenplay. This
habit could induce irritation, sometimes even panic. One
164
T / i e S e c ret La n g u a g e of F ilm
day we read that a bomb had exploded in Paris's Saere-
Coeur basilica- The report electrified us, for we had just
dreamed up (for That Obscure Object of Desire) a terror-
ist group claiming to act in the name of Baby Jesus-
Next morning, full of anxiety, we opened the paper
to find out what the inquiry had yielded. Not another
word* Other news had swallowed the basilica. It is al-
ways deflating when reality is served to you by the press.
The great bulk of that day s news held no interest for us;
the item that fascinated us had vanished suddenly and
forever*
That is why reality is not enough* The imaginary must
graft itself onto reality, must distort it, strengthen it.
I remember another morning. Bunuel came in look-
ing pale and worried. 1 asked him what was wrong. “ Ev-
erything^ finished/ he said. 'There's really no point in
going on working. The end of the world is just about
here. ’ I asked him why he was so alarmed.
“Haven't you read the paper? he replied. “Two
Swiss bankers committed suicide on the same day!”
Yet the world went on, the next day and the days that
followed* A disappointment, perhaps.
Another part of our work was telling one another our
dreams every morning. If we had forgotten them we — or
at least I — would make them up. I kept in mind Andre
Breton s words about a man he didn't like: “lie s a
swine. He never dreams,”
Newspapers, then dreams: our sum of the everyday.
And this of course was supplemented through the long
hours of the day by reflection, improvisation, and inven-
tion, to which we were bound by contract. A rambling
and loosely organized kind of intellectual inquiry which
J e a n - C l a u d e C a rr i e re
could sometimes get utterly lost in childhood memories
or stories about a mutual friend, in pictures seen and
things read, and which could be broken by long silences
in which each of us could, or almost could, like Edgar
Allan Poe, gropingly follow the other's thoughts. It could
all disintegrate into laughter, even quarrels; and then
suddenly, out of nowhere, a scene would materialize and
was hurried indoors and tidied up. We moved tables,
chairs, and lights around to make a rudimentary set, and
we began to act, making things up as we went, over and
over, three times, six times, ten times. At each run-
through, words and movements grew sharper. And out of
this disordered activity something was bom. Very soon 1
would start to take notes so as not to forget this phrase or
that movement, born of improvisation — of the kind it is
o fte n impossible to reca 1 1 1 ater on .
Sometimes such a road leads nowhere. Scenes lapse
into silence, discouragement. You return to your waiting.
You tell yourself that you will never come up with any-
thing worthwhile, anything that will be wholly satisfac-
tory to both of you, Yon call the waiter and order a coffee.
You go back to the papers, to tills or that story that has
already been covered several times. You look out at the
landscape, which hasn't changed. You re a couple of in-
sects seeking a way out of a jar, There is a secret exit
somewhere, a way out to vast open spaces.
Agitation, shot through with real spells of boredom.
The strangest of activities, impossible to describe.
As for training the imagination, the muscle which
makes the essential breakthroughs, we did a daily exer-
cise that required real discipline. For a half-hour, at the
end of every afternoon s work, J would stay alone in my
166
The Secret Language of Film
room while Bunuel made his solitary way to the bar —
his holy of holies, preferably peopled by shadows — and
ordered his evening cocktail.
Thus separated, each of us committed himself to in-
venting, in half an hour, a story. It could be short or long,
present or past sad or slapstick, or even just a detail, a
joke. Once this was done, I joined him in the bar and we
traded discoveries. They could be related to the screen-
play of the moment, or not — it didn't matter. The point
was to keep the imagination on its toes, to force it to
arouse itself at the very hour — the end of the day— when
it tends to doze off.
As I entered the bar I could tell from Luis s face
whether he was pleased or let down by his day s discov-
ery. And this ability was probably mutual, for every face
lights up at the onset of a good idea.
Sometimes, earlier in the day, as we struggled with a
tricky scene which nothing seemed to resolve, he would
say, ' Perhaps it’ll come to me tonight, with the help of
gin,”
You cannot advise everyone in Search of an idea to
seek out a snug and peaceful bar, slowly drink a dry
martini, and let things take their course. For some it
wouldn't work. But there isn't the slightest doubt that for
Bunuel it was fertile ground. With the slow warmth of
the alcohol rising in him, he said, he felt movements in
the air, saw fleeting images, he even saw characters slide
silently from one bar stool to the next.
From Jacques Tati's cafe terrace to the dim bar
where Bunuel waited for rne, there were countless such
propitious places. 1 have written scenes of the Maha-
hharata stuck in Madras traffic jams, or else waiting with
167
/ e a n - C l a u cl e C arri ere
Peter Brook in a regional airport in India for a plane that
might or might not land. On the other hand, there are
imaginations that are capricious and even compulsive,
insisting, for example, on the presence of the color red,
or flute music, or excessive heat, or the sound of surf
Reading the requirements of writers, including screen-
writers, you are tempted to believe you are thumbing
through a catalog of serious deviants, l knew one screen-
writer capable of being driven over the edge by the
sound of just one bird. Fetishism? A mask for laziness?
An unpleasant distant memory, some trauma?
Who knows. Fortunately, such things are not much
studied.
What seems more or less certain is that the field is
truly limitless. You can set up obstacles in it, of course.
You can also wander in it aimlessly and get lost. You can
plow the field any way you choose. Rut plow it you must.
Anyone can dream of a film needing no care, But lie must
not he surprised if prudent visitors avoid it.
So plowing is essential. But so is benign neglect,
so is leaving the land fallow, You can abandon a story
for weeks, months, years perhaps. No matter; its life
does not necessarily come to a halt. A long and invisible
process goes on without your knowledge. You must
all ow it to exist, grant yourself moments of rest, of lotus-
eating, of woolgathering. A part of you stays awake.
And one of these days, if all goes well, you will harvest
the fruits.
Those of us who toil in this obscure area learn that
human imagination is perfectly innocent, and that we
168
T h e S e c re t La ng tt a g e of L i ( m
should constantly struggle against our own prohibitions.
Contrary to what religion has dinned into us over the
centuries, there is no 'sinful thought, no ‘crime ol in-
tent/ On the contrary, we must welcome everything,
imagine everything. The screenwriter (when he is in-
venting) is entitled and probably required to be vulgar,
odious, bigoted, and exploitative, a loathsome potential
criminal. Several times a day he must kill his father, rape
his mother, sell his sister, and betray his country. Letting
all barriers melt away, forcing himself to wear an absurd
or unpleasant mask, he has to seek out the criminal
within, or the man of bad taste, or the man he hates, the
man lie wouldn’t for anything in the world try to Ire.
Rest assured, he will find them all.
Just as a theoretical or didactic approach at the outset
of a project can mask fatal dangers (nothing is so easy or
so incapacitating as theory), so self-censorship, recoiling
in fear, or refusing to see oneself whole are acts of castra-
tion, transgressions, assaults on the imagination that will
sooner or later exact their toll.
Not only must the screenwriter learn to look into his
own dark depths during the very act of writing, but he
must have the courage to show himself to his partner.
He must have the courage to suggest this or that particu-
lar idea, stubbornly arguing its soundness even though
he also realizes it is dangerous, even vile, even dis-
gusting. He must submit to an unending exercise in
shamelessness in order to lose his fear of the judgment of
others, to drop the cloak of respectable aloofness behind
which he hides like a timid fish.
For he never works alone, even when there is no one
else there. Fie is himself multiple. If there is a more or
J e a n-Cla u d e C a r r i e re
less well-disguised swine inside him, there is also an
ascetic and a dove, All of them will act and react. It is
inevitable. The swine will not be allowed to write the
screenplay all on his own.
A film is complete when the screenplay has vanished. Its
structure has faded from view. All the audience's intelli-
gence focuses on the film itself, not on the way the film
was made. Of course, you can announce (as Jean-Luc
Godard sometimes did) that the film itself is “a film in
the making/" a process we are supposed to witness and
share (but since cinema is not immediate, like theatre,
what Godard proposes is just another form of illusion).
Otherwise, all the preparatory work disappears. All the
joints, all the necessary information injected as the work
progressed, are now assimilated into the action itself
The scaffolding has melted away.
Now every image 1 and every word surprises us. Sud-
denly everything is unexpected. Yet at the same time it
all seems inevitable, Everything has lev! up to it. It is
what we had secretly striven to achieve. In these privi-
leged, astonishing, and essential first moments, the film
embodies and gives clear shape to our original desire,
affording it a satisfaction which is the livelier for being
unexpected, undreamed-of
And in the hope (often dashed but springing eternal)
of attaining such moments, we must learn to rid our-
selves gently (remember Titian and Delacroix) o! the
technical skill we have so laboriously acquired. Bunuel
used to call it 'the fix-all/ A too-glittering discovery, too
glittering] > r displayed, can shatter the audience's inti-
170
T h e S e ere t Lung u a g e a f F i l m
mate bond with a film. It can disconnect us, just like the
actor who comes onstage dazzlingly costumed, or the
excessively resplendent set which elicits our admiring
gasp.
For then our admiration is directed at the beauty of
that one image, a beauty detached and isolated from the
film itself, It is a beauty that has without our knowledge
disconnected us, the beauty of an image or the flash and
glitter of words,
Peter Brook tells about a popular British stage actor
who used to raise a hand to let audiences know that
a witty line was on its way. Watch out, here it comes,
this is a good one! In their own way, many filmmakers
do the same thing, half the time without even realizing
it. But what I call the “meat of the film ’ is located be-
yond words and images, in the indefinable realm of
feeling, of the vital bond linking human beings, in that
secret sumptuous nourishment whose absence invari-
ably leaves us hungry.
In a screenplay the requisite disappearance of the
skeleton of the story, the erasure of visible effects, has
only one goal; to transform invention into apparent real-
ity, To give life and truth to what is born of whim and a
slow breaking- in process. The imagination must do its
work and then metamorphose, give up its glitter and
sometimes its personal arrogance; it must act as if it were
no longer there, having yielded its place to reality. It
must return to its dark lair to await the next offensive.
So it conquers by disappearing. It is like raw material
that has vanished into thin air, still present but impalpa-
ble, Here we are probably at the secret heart of the ma-
chinery, There is not much we can say about it.
1 71
J e a n - C l a u de C a rri e te
We are in the presence of the triumph of what is no
longer seen. It is like those years of stubborn practice
that pave the way for the athlete s few simple moves
when the day of competition arrives.
The screenplay is not only the dream of a film but its
infancy. It goes through a toddling, stammering phase,
gradually discovering its strengths and its weaknesses.
As it gains confidence it begins to move under its own
power, once again recalling Peter Brook's formless
hunch which sharpens and grows stronger day by day.
But a film can also age and be snapped up by death.
This will he a natural death if the film has simply ceased
to interest us, if our memory rejects it. turns away from
it We rightly say that it has become unwatchable. Some
films may even be stillborn, unseen from the moment of
their birth and forever alter.
But it can also be accidental death— when earth-
quake or fire (like the one in Mexico City's Cinemateca
in 1982) destroys rare copies, or when one of those mys-
terious corrosion phenomena occurs, attacking film in
the heart of the bunkers protecting it.
In this progression from the potential to the actual,
from the dream film or infant film to the aware, adult
film, the screenwriter learns to withdraw gradually from
the adventure. In the first months he is the master. The
film belongs to him. He knows all its twists and turns;
sometimes he is the only one to see it.
Then they decide to start shooting, and he has to
relinquish power. The project gets away from him. It has
to move into other hands in order to live.
1 72
The Secret Language of Film
It is a risky transition. To avoid any break, any radical
or heretical change of tone, the director should be close
to the screenwriter from the beginning, working with
him from die very start* Thus, even at this early stage,
the film will also be the director's, which it will be in the
credits and history books anyway. The transition will
have been more natural, with fewer jolts and scars. Di-
rector and screenwriter will have grown accustomed to-
gether to the child they are expecting.
Together, without even realizing it, they will have
invented images, heard phrases and sounds. This first
aspect of the film belongs to them both.
When we worked together, Bunuel often asked me
to draw scenes from the film, which 1 did alone in mv
room at night. The next day, before I showed him my
drawings, we did a rapid check of how we saw things. J
would ask, for instance, “Where's the door in the para-
chute scene?'
He at once answered, “On the left/’
“The mistress of the house?”
“On the right, by the couch.”
And so on, almost always in agreement, ft happened
hundreds of times. Even though we sat opposite one
another — his right being my left and vice versa — we had
the same vision of the general arrangement of the set, of
the characters’ positions. As our discussions and impro-
visations developed, an inner form took residence in us,
like a secret lodger, a form ultimately stronger than the
geographic arrangement of the hotel room we worked in.
We were indeed already in the same film together.
* 4 *
1 73
J e a n -C la u de C a rr i e re
In the 1950s, with a few notable exceptions (Robert Bres-
son, Tati, jean Renoir, Jacques Becker), screenwriters
dominated the French cinema. The director s function
was generally limited to putting the story into pictures,
a technical but demanding formality; All films looked
alike. The only difference was in the stories they told.
I lie form seemed forever fixed — in France and else-
where.
This seductive adversary (which tells us “respect the
rules of art and you will d\\ be artists ) is called formal-
ism. It puts form first- it insists on seeing all thin
through this imposed screen. Eisenstein denounced it
most energetically — and sometimes fell prey to it
Starting in the late 1950s, the New Wave violently
overthrew formalism and monotony. Above all else, the
new filmmakers insisted that every film bear the stamp
of its author, that this author necessarily be the director,
and that in consequence something definite must hap-
pen when shooting starts. This call to arms rang through
th e world. An explosion of styles, of genres, and even of
shooting techniques followed — and all this at a time
when television, the new monster, was insidiously chal-
lenging the supremacy of cinemas, those palaces of the
people that we had believed would stand forever.
The new conception naturally tossed the screen-
writer into oblivion. He was no longer needed. The di-
rector, promoted to sole “author,'' staked exclusive claim
to the terrain. The screenwriter became a suspect and
probably dangerous character, a subspecies among writ-
ers, a failed novelist capable only of a tireless rehashing
of his necessarily mediocre recipes.
So we the audience were subjected to a fearsome
174
T he Sec re t La n g u age of F i f m
avalanche of intimate narcissistic works, recollections,
little fantasies, poetic effusions, greeting-card messages;
we were even shown the director himself in the modish
throes of creation.
But these too were unwatchable films, since they ad-
dressed themselves only to the director himself and a
few of his acolytes. The essential ingredient, contact
with others, was lost.
Already exposed to television’s increasingly seduc-
tive wiles, audiences naturally fled these vaporous films,
which rotted on the shelves. By the end of the 1960s the
screenplay was hack. Quick, quick, tell us a story! The
need was desperate.
All balancing acts are difficult, for they work only
once. Everything has to be reinvented daily. The shared
journey of a screenwriter and a director is like a love
story. You have to feel your way blindly, seeking com-
mon ground, common likes and dislikes. When Bun tie 1
saw me for the first time at a lunch in Cannes, the first
question he asked me, looking straight into my eyes —
and 1 sensed that the question was a deep, serious one
that might decide our life together — was:
“Do you drink wine?"
When I said yes, adding that I came from a family of
winegrowers, his features relaxed, he smiled at me, he
called the wine waiter. At least we shared that taste.
Later, of course, we discovered others.
When I meet a director with whom I am committed
to spending several months of my life, I always ask my-
self: what film does he hope to make? \ might as well get
an idea now, since in any case he is the one who will be
making it. Sometimes lie does not yet know. He too sees
175
J e a a -Cl a u d e C a r r i e re
nothing but a vague shape, which together we will try to
bring into the open.
And so, out of those first hesitant moves, discoveries,
false starts, out of those early moments of pleasure and
of strife, out of jealousies, misunderstandings, a little
boredom, much pessimism, a betrothal results. The
question to be avoided at all costs, I believe — as with
any promising couple — is who will be the dominant
partner. It is of no importance. This is not a contest, and
the audience doesn't care.
A minor personal victory ( T worn I got him to agree
to my idea!" ) is senseless. It can even be a defeat for the
film, and the film alone counts,
There are moments when the screenwriter is deeply,
honestly convinced that his idea is right, that he is justi-
fied in fighting for it, but how can one be sure one is
being honest with oneself, that self-esteem is totally out
of the picture? We are, all of us, utterly convinced that
our taste and judgment are the best in the world. How
do we quell that inner presumption of superiority which
makes our ideas look better than those of others ?
How are we to focus only on the work in hand? How
are we to rein in our appetite for glory, money, and
power?
Buhuel often said that films should be like cathe-
drals. The authors" names should be removed from the
credits, leaving just a few anonymous reels, pure, free of
any trace of their creator. Then we would watch diem
the way we enter a cathedral, not knowing the names of
those who built it, or even the master builder.
But the path taken by films — and by every other me-
dium — leads in the opposite direction. Dogged by crit-
1 76
Th e S e ere t La n g u a fie of F i / m
ics, hounded by packs of hairsplitting historians, the
creator has been increasingly thrust to the lore. He can
even count for more than his work (in Van Gogh's case
there is no room for doubt), so more and more a work’s
creator is in the limelight. The first thing you look for in
a painting today is the signature. It is the spirit of the
times: we turn artists into media stars,
A screenwriter has to make do. He must accept the
fact that the public gives the director credit for ideas and
intentions that are often his own. Basically, as we know
full well, it is all just a matter of vanity. Even true fame,
that superannuated romantic notion, is a little suspect in
the climate of our times.
The wound is not fatal, and we take comfort where
we can.
What happens between two or more people who
work together? Nobody is quite sure. We don’t even
know what goes on within ourselves at the moment of
creation. We feel inside us, perhaps, a miniature theatre
at work, in which we are both actors and audience (al-
though it’s an audience naturally disposed to he indul-
gent). We want to like what “it” offers us. Most often it
wins us over even before it starts — unless, on the con-
trary, our critical spirit is so ferocious that it makes us
hiss at everything our imagination begets. Some authors
are instantly delighted by everything they invent, while
others remain forever dissatisfied. Both attitudes are
harmful and incapacitating.
This step-by-step discovery of a theme, a story, a
style — a highly erratic process, marked by long dry
spells and sudden flashes — closely resembles the work
of an actor venturing into a part. What will he find? At
1 77
J e an - C Un id v ( ■ h r r i e r e
first he has no idea. A play — by Shakespeare, say, or
Chekhov — always presents a vibrant and indefinable
whole, impervious to the most piercing analysis, it is out
of the question to tackle those plays as if they were the
expression of a particular point of view. To do so would
mean stifling them, strangling them, the eternal pitfall of
limited directors, who invariably force their own terms
on anything which is beyond their comprehension.
During rehearsals for one of Pirandello's plays, a
high-strung actress said to the playwright, "Maestro, I
foil to understand On page twenty-seven my character
says this. On page fifty-four she says that. Can it be possi-
ble, given everything that has happened to her, her mo-
tives, her character, that she has changed so much, that
she can say such a thing after having clearly said
Pirandello patiently heard her out (he was a polite
man). She spoke at length, asking the usual questions.
When she finally stopped he said, as if it were obvious,
"But why are you asking me all this? I am the author/
It seems right, despite the apparent paradox, because
a true author never knows exactly what lie meant. He
scarcely knows what lie said. He is what Victor Hugo
called the mouth of darkness/ Words are transmitted
through him, often quite beyond his control. They come
from obscure regions; this richer and deeper his genius,
the vaster those regions will be. They are regions lie
shares with others, and even, in the case of the greatest
authors, with all humankind, for he becomes one of hu-
ll utility /s voices.
Here 1 would like to interject a few words from
Martin Buber: “We must lose the sense of sell. We must
listen only for the Word speaking into a person's ear.
178
The Secret Language of Film
As soon as we start to hear our own voice we must be
silent.”
Here we have moved far beyond the concept of the
author s- film.
Pirandello's answer was right for another reason: it
was an elegant way of telling the actress, “But that is
your job, my dear. You are paid to find the road from
page twenty-seven to page fifty -four. You are committed
to finding it. And you have a director to guide you,”
But there must always be a clear stretch at the start
of rehearsals. There must be minimal understanding if
the actor is not to launch wildly into the blue, “No point
in getting excited before we know why/’ Peter Brook
tells actors who seek the easy way out in excessive emo-
tional display. A calm approach and a lucid and thought-
ful reading are helpful, if only in laying bare what is
vague or contradictory in the writing, what is likely to
cause difficulty.
But the most serious, the most pernicious illusion —
and here the actor's and the author's paths converge, in
film as on the stage — is when we convince ourselves
that the intellectual approach is enough, that intelligent
analysis will cover every contingency. All that is needed,
we tell ourselves, is for the author to know what he
means, draw up a precise plan, define his structures —
an d the rest will fo 1 1 o w , I n w hie b c a se the ac t< >T s pe r fo r-
mance, too, would simply be a translation into words and
gestures of an idea the mind has already chewed over.
The mind fosters its own illusion that it can know,
understand, analyze, and invent anything. The effects of
th is illusion are dangerous and subtle, the more so be-
cause the ordinary instruments of this intellectual quest
179
jean -Cl a u de C a rr i e re
(thought, reflection, introspection) in a sense work upon
themselves. Thus thought permanently secretes its own
illusion, which is the belief that it thinks, and in conse-
quence that it knows ( I know Mexico, I know Shake-
speare h very usual illusions). Just as consciousness (to
adopt other terminology) easily persuades itself that it is
wakeful, attentive, free.
Or more accurately, thought — the actor s, the au-
thor's, anyone's— imagines it can distinguish itself from
itself It thinks it can examine itself from the outside as a
discrete, static object, whereas it is exactly the opposite:
indistinct, shifting, vague.
Since wo believe (or neurologists assert) that the
human brain, that prodigious organ, is also a great idle
blob which delights in simplifications and reductions, a
dullwitted prodigy quite ready to applaud the first witty
(or noisy) phrase it encounters, the pitfalls lying in wait
for both author and actor are legion. Our brain likes to
seduce itself, to outwit itself like a conjurer astonished
by his own skill and honestly assuming that he is a real
miracle-worker, even applauding himself at the end of
his act.
Our brain— our mind, if you prefer — is ever ready
for self worship, ever ready to adore whatever springs
from its own depths, It no longer realizes that it is at
once adorer and adored, that it is both instrument and
obstacle.
Sooner or later we will have to escape it, abandon
intelligence and its tricks. Both author and actor must
pierce through to the next zone, or next zones, those
which analysis can neither penetrate nor define, the dark
zones where true mystery dwells.
180
T h e S e c re t Langu a ge of F i l m
At a certain stage understanding ceases. It has to.
Beneath it (or above, or all around: clearly such spatial
concepts have no meaning) we must let things go, we
must not try to probe those life-generating mists. For real
life, whole life, is there, in that constant baek-and-forth
movement from light to darkness, from light to the little-
known and boundless jungle we can explore only
through action and play.
Back and forth between exploration and reflection,
between the light and darkness, between fallow and
plowed.
In the same way, work on a screenplay often operates
in a series of waves. The first waves are exploratory. We
open all the doors and we begin to seek, neglecting no
path, no blind alley. The imagination launches unbri-
dled into a hunt which can lead it into the vulgar, the
absurd, the grotesque, which can even make the imagi-
nation forget the theme that is the object of the hunt.
Whereupon another wave rears, surging in the oppo-
site direction, Th is is the backwash, the withdiawal to
what is reasonable, essential, to the old question: exactly
why are we making this and not some other film? Quite
simply, what basically interests us here?
This is the moment when, like Pirandello s agitated
actress, we survey the road the characters have traveled;
but we also look at verisimilitude, structure, interest,
levels of audience understanding. By backtracking, by
re tu rn i n g to ( > ur c >ri gi n a 1 ga r de n , we o l > v ions I y al > at i d on
along the way the majority of our illusory conquests —
but not necessarily all of them. We return to scholarly,
sometimes commonplace and even pettifogging con-
cerns. They help us take stock: in the heat of the chase
181
Jean- Cl a u d e C a r r i e re
we might easily have forgotten to bring along our sup-
plies, our drinking water, our maps.
Rare are the authors who can afford, on their own,
this balanced and impartial movement between the two
zones. But a working partnership, with the director for
example, can make it possible.
The two seemingly opposing waves are complemen-
tary. There is no such thing as a screenplay launched in
a total vacuum. At the very least you have to allow For
the film's duration and the available budget You must
also take stock at every step: are the characters ahead of
the audience or lagging behind? There is no point in
laying the groundwork for a surprise if the audience has
already guessed everything. And audiences guess a great
deal. Where, we must ask, is our elusive and hypotheti-
cal audience at this stage of our story? Is it still interested
in what we are telling it? Or has it already left the the-
atre, or switched channels? Is this scene clear enough or
do we have to weigh it down a little? Does everyone
know this word? Will we recognize this setting again
after seeing it only once before, by night? Will we get
permission to shoot on the Eiffel Tower? Is this line too
long, or too enigmatic? Chekhov made an unforgettable
observation; Tt is best to avoid describing a mood. We
must try to make it understandable through the hero’s
actions, Are we remaining strictly faithful to this ideal?
On the other hand, a screenplay that simply an-
swered these questions would be no more than a meticu-
lous bureaucratic exercise. It is timely breakthroughs,
engineered by the imagination (or in the actor’s case by
improvisation), that shake things up, ignite, exalt,
The quest is never-ending. But every now and then,
182
Th e S e cret La ng u a g e of F i I m
actor and author have the feeling that the two waves
have met. Something has surged forth. A union has been
achieved.
This union, dazzling and ephemeral, can leave the
actor in a kind of stupor as he walks off-stage.
It leaves the author equally stupefied. He too is dou-
ble, triple, at times multiple. Instead of separating and
compartmentalizing, he is welding different levels to-
gether, He is at once consciousness and unconscious-
ness, order and randomness. He is unceasing motion that
can even seem aberrant and gratuitous, he is a quest.
Life as we ordinarily perceive it is confused and even
incoherent We walk down a street, we hear snatches of
sentences, we see people of whom we know nothing
performing actions whose significance eludes us, We
perceive sounds without even hearing them, smells, col-
ors Hashing by; we feel heat, or cold, or the fatigue that
comes from carrying a heavy burden uphill. Every one
of these feelings can predominate turn by turn, de-
pending on the individual, the mood, the moment
Writing a story or a screenplay means injecting order
into this disorder: making a preliminary selection of
sounds, actions, and words; discarding most of them,
then stressing and reinforcing the material selected. It
means violating reality (or at least what we perceive of
reality) to rebuild it in another way, confining the images
within a given frame, selecting the real— voices, emo-
tions, and sometimes ideas,
Even if this inescapable selection is nut made until
the editing stage, this is the precise moment when arti-
183
J e a n - C la u d e Car ri e re
fke enters the picture, whatever we do to resist or deny
it, Better to acknowledge it, accept it, and yield to that
second reality which is often more real, more compact,
and sharper than the one we first saw in the disorder of
the streets.
Conversely, a last barrier of mistrust is essential — for
both actor and author are widely considered to possess
inspiration^ passion^ enthusiasm, even madness* In fact,
these so-called poetic states usually proceed not from an
expansion but from a shrinking of the self. They are the
product of willing blindness. In everyday working real-
ity, nothing justifies them. Instead of succumbing, of
yielding to the How, we should avoid them as we would
a mood “enhancing drug, the kind that would have us
adoring whatever we produced.
I remember those thousands of poets in the late
1960 s who smoked fat joints or took hashish and then
wrote exultantly through the night, deeply convinced of
their genius. When they read their work by the cold light
of day, it alt seemed woefully lifeless. Their heads
throbbing, they were the first to agree* The same with co-
caine. The difficulty is to find the real excitement within
you while only sporadically losing your judgment
Spontaneity, sincerity , self-searching; three more
meaningless words, They are always used in connection
with supposed virtues; they even carry a moral connota-
tion (it is good to be spontaneous and sincere, it is bad
to be a shrewd tactician). Only fairly long experience
and a particular mindset— neither prudish nor aloof but
devoid of exhibitionism — allow you to let a scene come
184
The S e ere t L a n gu age of F i l m
to you, to live it, improvise it, to let yourself be briefly
taken over by a factor outside your ken, to give free rein
to voice and body without losing vital control. In the best
moments (rare, always unexpected), it all comes to-
gether. Nothing stands apart. Contradictions are swal-
lowed up. You are no longer switching back and forth
but advancing on a united front*
Swift miracles.
The screenwriter works hemmed in by a throng of tech-
nical constraints and commercial demands. He commits
himself to a project that must necessarily be transformed
beyond all recognition. Denied the novelists comfort-
able introspection, he is usually required to describe his
characters from the outside in. He knows his work is
doomed to disappear; he himself is usually unknown to
audiences, even by name, He therefore spends much of
his life asking, “How can I ever give expression to who
I am? How can I— like other, better-known artists—
make my voice heard as well ? "
Yet Flaubert fought with might and main for the
opposite, for the total eclipse of the author. He unre-
servedly admired the independent, objective existence
of Shakespeare's work, which is unmarked by its maker s
heart and hand.
You can study Shakespeare your whole life long, yet
the man he was will always slip through your fingers.
His work tells us everything, and of him we know noth-
ing* Was lie a right- or left-winger? Garrulous or close-
mouthed? Did he prefer town to country? Women to
men? No answer.
185
J e a n - C I a u d e C e r r i e re
The peerless author is hidden in his characters, to
whom he has given the best of himself and who in their
turn express every feeling under the sun, lie is the great
and authentic voice of the shadows. With him, the un-
seen triumphs. Supreme irony; the summit of glory
is nameless ness. And the most personal voice of all is
everyman’s.
The screenwriter, a cog in the film machine, believes
himself gagged, shunted aside, very often betrayed. Peo-
ple constantly, irritatingly, ask him, "Why don’t you
write something personal?
As if the words something personal possessed supe-
rior virtue, inhabited loftier levels of existence, as if it
were more important to be personal than useful, as if
once again, by some strange twist, only the author
counted, not his work.
Vet the screenwriter is the first to know, or at least to
guess (on certain days), that the notion of person aba t-all -
eosts work sputtered out long ago, that no book and no
film exists unless it speaks to others, that an author de-
voti n g h i m sc 1 f e xc 1 us i vely to gi 1 d ing his i mage or hi Gat-
ing his bank account would swiftly dry up and disappear.
The screenwriter exists only to transmit certain feel-
ings from one person to another. Me is today s storyteller,
pursuing an ancient tradition with modern means. The
Berber speaking and singing on the public square in
Marrakesh plies the same trade 1 do. To those who listen
to him, the stories he strings together are necessary. 11 We
must listen to stories? someone says in the Mahahha-
rata * Tt is pleasant, and sometimes it makes us better.”
Like earthworms burrowing through garden soil to
fertilize it, stories burrow from one person to the next
186
Th e S e ere t L a n g u a ge o f F i I m
and sometimes from one people to the next, The route
these stories take is unpredictable, but they carry a price-
less cargo. What they say is told only by them.
An old Arab allegory depicts the storyteller as a man
standing on a rock and addressing the ocean. He scarcely
has time to drink a glass of water between stories. The
sea listens, spellbound. One story follows another.
And the allegory adds: Tf one day the storyteller
falls silent, or someone silences him, no one can say
what the ocean will dof
187
TRIMS
O nce a film has taken its final shape, discarded
strips of film of varying length remain in the
cutting room. They have found no place in the finished
work and will probably disappear. We call them ‘ trims.
Here, before they can vanish beyond hope of recall, are
some of mine*
Not shown: in Casablanca, in Morocco ? not a single real
Moroccan. The white presence rules* We are at home;
we have brought our Western problems along in our
Western luggage. The natives are insignificant bystand-
ers, reduced to background, almost superfluous. And a
closer look reveals that they are whites in makeup. Con-
clusion; Africa is us.
Compare this with certain vast seventeenth-century
/ e a n -Cl a u d e C a rri ere
canvases, for instance Lebrun s The Battles of Alexan-
der. Savage fighting, on the widest of screens, but never
a drop of blood.
The power of the not-seen. Laurel slips a raw egg into
Hardy s pocket and then gives the pocket a slap. Hardy,
who lias put up no resistance, pokes his pocket open
with a finger and peers inside.
We do not see what he sees, We do not need to. Why
film a crushed egg in a jacket pocket? What we imagine
is stronger, and above al l funnier.
Frequently used effects: a car we hear crashing, a
cake falling from a table into a diner s lap, a monster in
the eyes of a screaming woman,
Resisting the temptation to show, Up to what point,
though?
The influence— inadequately explored (how could we
explore it?) — of film on reading. Does it help us see? We
cannot tell for sure. Inevitably, people fit the faces of
well-known actors to Balzac's characters, For years, Ge-
rard Phi 1 ipe represented a sort of ideal, omnipresent, all-
purpose film incarnation of characters from Corneille to
Stendhal for French audiences.
The star homogenizes. He prevents us from seeing
the individual, the character. He is a mask; we see only
him. Often he doesn’t reveal but conceals.
* * *
190
The Secret Language of Film
In the 1970s iti Prague I encountered a “human movie,
lie knew several banned films by heart (he had seen
them abroad). People invited him to dinner; alter the
meal the guests made a circle and he ‘told them the
movie— that evening it was The Discreet Charm of
the Bourgeoisie — forgetting not a single scene, not a sin-
gle line. Shades of Fahrenheit 451 .
A dialogue-writing exercise: give voices to characters. It
can verge on madness. Who is speaking? Through whose
mouth? Each character has to have his own voice, yet
each of these voices is also the author s. The unending
minuet! In Les Enfant s dv Paradis, Arletty, Pierre Re-
noir, and Louis Salon, all from different social back-
grounds, use neither the same syntax nor the same
vocabulary. Yet all of them speak Prevert.
What initially struck people about film was its ability to
depict reality. In 1914 an American essayist whose name
I forget said that compared to film, painting was "ridicu-
lous caricature? Prime Levi has noted how difficult de-
scription is in novels, whereas in film everything seems
simple. To show, you just turn the camera on.
But to show what? Reality? A flat image of reality?
Are we really sure that a description by Balzac, in which
reality is sifted through a screen of words, is not denser
and deeper and finally more palpable than a slow pan-
oramic shot across the same objects?
Is the eye truly supreme?
191
J e a n-Cl a u d e C a rrie re
* * *
Film (they say) is a popular art form that now seems
restricted to a dwindling audience of filmmakers and
filmgoers, No one can really say why. Perhaps because,
in television, the cinema has met an even more popular
challenger. But this is not certain. Nor, I believe, is the
game over.
In most countries, particularly in the Third World
(with the exception of India, China, and Iran), it is get-
ting harder, chiefly for economic reasons, to make films,
rhe North American audiovisual industry has launched
an all-out war. It seeks worldwide monopoly. Many
countries didn’t wake up to this in time and failed to
protect themselves. Today, despite its vast potential mar-
ket, starting a film company in a country like Brazil is an
almost inevitable prelude to heroic failure.
American films, or rather American audiovisual prod-
ucts, movies and TV combined, are spreading across the
globe and slowly annihilating local production.
This conquest is in fact a reconquest. In the early
1920s Hollywood enjoyed a near-monopoly on the man-
ufacture of motion pictures, accounting for some eighty
percent of world production. This percentage dropped
in the following decades with the rise of foreign motion-
picture industries and the outbreak of the Second World
War, which cut a large swath of territories oil hom Amer-
ican distribution.
In 1945 the reconquest began. Its aims were clear
W2
Th e S ecret Languag e of Film
and openly acknowledged Its promoters consider film a
consumer product like any other, of no particular cultural
importance. They pursue their massive program ol re-
conquest with every weapon that comes to hand. They
have even been known to give certain television series
to Brazilian and Russian networks, virtually free of
charge.
It is a rational enterprise aimed at depriving ail other
countries, across the board, of their cinematic voice.
"M ovies are us/ runs the American message, clear-eyed
and uncompromising. “Why don t you make something
else?”
Perhaps to skirt the kind of name-calling trap that
sees Americans routinely stigmatized as “imperialists”
and the French as “chauvinists,” we should recall that
our opposing viewpoints, which clashed along a broad
front during the recent GATT talks, are rooted in sepa-
rate b ut para 11 el traditions,
The Anglo-Saxon tradition is the older of the two. It
goes back to an early eighteenth -century edict of Queen
Anne's, which gave printers the right to run off copy (or
copyright). It allowed publishers and printers to buy a
work from an author and do what they wanted with it.
For nearly three centuries, with occasional ups and
downs, the tradition has flourished in northern Europe
and more recently in the United States.
A contrary tradition, born in late eighteenth-century
France with Beaumarchais, holds that the author of the
work remains its owner, with financial and moral lights
to the work, This conception, considerably developed by
Victor Hugo, has gained wide acceptance. It led, at the
193
/ e a n-Cl a u d e C a rri e re
end of the nineteenth century, to the signing of the
Berne Convention, which today is subscribed to by
nearly a hundred countries across die world.
This fundamental contradiction between the two tra-
ditions explains wliv American film, never considered
an art, has for so long been the work of producers, In
Europe, on the other hand (and particularly in France),
the idea that film is a form of artistic expression (and
even an art in its own right) has taken root and matured.
Like the directors and critics who launched the New
Wave* the author or authors of films, insisting on the
personal nature of their work and guaranteed rights to
that work by the Berne Convention, considered them-
selves artists on a par with painters and writers.
With this immediate consequence: if film is indeed
an art, a legitimate form of cultural expression, it de-
serves to be given official support, even perhaps to be
protected. In France this support comes from the Minis-
try of Culture; since 1947 it has taken different forms,
chief among them a tax on cinema box-office receipts
which goes to finance future film production.
The various issues that divided us during the GATT
talks in no way diminish our old and lasting admiration
for the enormous achievements of the American cinema.
It is absurd to claim that Europe wants to shut itself off
from American production, gi ven that American images
occupy seventy percent of our movie and television
screens. Indeed, film seems to be part of the very flesh
and blood of America. We could no more imagine
America without film than we con Id imagine living (as
the Iranians must) deprived of American film,
In fact, the whole quarrel is based on a misunder-
194
Th e S e c re t La ng u a g e of /■' i I m
standing. Once we have set it aside it becomes obvious
that our two traditions, which have always coexisted,
most often in total harmony, cannot possibly be amal-
gamated* It would be like asking a soccer team and an
American football team to take the field together. Clearly
impossible*
Nor can either tradition replace the other. They must
go on coexisting. In the world ahead any kind ol monop-
oly on the visual image would be unjust for some and
dangerous for everyone.
In the discussions surrounding GATT or the North
American Free Trade Agreement, the constant watch-
word of American negotiators was Tree competition/’
Unfortunately, the term doesn’t mean the same thing ev-
erywhere. Could we call Mali and California Tree to
compete with each other? That would clearly be mean-
ingless* The term is a nineteenth-century formulation
that masks boundless economic greed. Or, as someone
put it; “A free fox in a free henhouse/'
What the most ferocious measures of dictatorial re-
gimes have historically failed to achieve — the silencing
of the voice of nations — a simple trading clause could
still bring about* In many countries, in fact, this has al-
ready happened. In the name of liberalizing the mar-
ket (and not always foreseeing the danger}, producers
and authors have lowered their guard* And the fox has
come in through the front door, bringing with him bas-
ket! ids of images and sounds, but also a whole gamut of
products — clothes, drinks, cereals, vehicles, cigarettes,
right down to the most basic items of everyday life-all
represented and often glorified by those same images.
We know too that we have embraced these moving
195
) ean-Claude ( ' a r r i e re
images as a universal language, Hut it is a language not
every people gets to speak. Or more accurately, has the
means to speak.
So at a deeper level we must ask whether the cine-
matographic image is necessary to nations. Is the ability
to tell ourselves our own stones with the most modern
means, to study ourselves in our own minor, merely a
way of enhancing life, or is it vital to life itself?
I believe it is vital to life. America’s distributors say
the opposite: what matter if Africans, Brazilians, even
Europeans can no longer make films? We II do it for
them.
Africans are already condemned to an exclusive tele-
vision diet of thrillers and romances made under alien
skies, images which never speak to Africans about
Africans.
The same danger threatens us.
The French production system- — probably the
world s most sophisticated, since it permits a mix of pub-
lic and private money — represents the last square of re-
sistance to the American invasion. If it collapses, not
only French cinema will disappear, but with it the last
vestiges of European cinema: farewell Wim Wenders,
Andrzej Wajda, Pedro Almodovar, Then Angelopoulos,
and so many others. And along with them every other
maker of ambitious, poetic, innovative cinema (cinema
still coproduced on the French model) across the world:
farewell Kurosawa, Mikhailkov, Vi Mu, and Souleynian
Gissc,
By defending ourselves we defend them too. Far
from being “chauvinists,” we are defending the right to
196
The Secret La nguage of Film
exist of different concepts
of film, wherever they may
arise.
Two radically different conceptions are at war.
The two countries that invented cinema, the United
States and France, once again face each other across the
battle lines. What an enormous pity, particularly when
you reflect that this commercial war is being waged in
one direction only. No one in Europe seeks the disap-
pearance of American film. That would be absurd and
unreal. American film is and has long been massively
represented cm our screens, and wo very much want it to
stay. Ours is practically nonexistent in the USA,
The poetics of censorship.
In the early 1960s, a Czechoslovak distributor bought
Vittorio de Sica's Miracle in Milan . He had to obtain the
permission of a censorship board, but was confident in
advance of success. The film was an attack on exploita-
tion of the masses, on capitalism. Tie was unconcerned.
In Prague the hoard viewed the film. The distributor
waited outside. Sternly, the chairman bore down on him
and told him the film could not be shown.
The distributor was flabbergasted. Why?
The board chairman thought for a moment Probably,
like his colleagues, he had felt that the film contained
unusual scenes possibly subversive of people's peace of
mind (Communist regimes bought only bland, mediocre
works abroad). And the end of De Sica s film actually
showed swarms of homeless people flying off on broom-
sticks around Milan Cathedral. A cathedral, a miracle:
i
/ ean-Ci a u d e C a rr i e re
better not to countenance that kind of thing! But what
reasons could he give? He racked his brains. Success.
"Because, lie said, “anyone who knows the layout
of Milan can clearly see that the homeless are flying off
to the West.
Inventiveness- quick thinking. What the chairman
saw in the film that day no one else had ever seen. The
distributor told the story years later with undi mini shed
resentment — but also with a certain admiration.
The dream image does not correspond to the film image.
The latter is flat, enclosed within margins of clear and
unchanging (or almost unchanging) configuration. It
looks pinned to the walk whereas the dream image is
wobbly, imprecise* shifting, vague, like snatches of
memory or hesitant ideas. A changing image, an image
that eludes itself, in which the closed eye sees only its
own interior, like a body flattened by centrifugal force
against the damp walls of a revolving globe, in which
there is no limit to the surprises and disappointments,
the alarms, and sometimes the delights. The one who
sees and the one seen: both together in the same bubble.
Together in the same unending metamorphosis. In its
best moments, the dream image of course resembles the
theatre image rather than that of film.
Sometimes blindness afflicts a whole Him crew. It is a
collective hallucination which does not make us see but
makes us not see. In a French film I worked on as both
scriptwriter and actor, L Alliance, directed by Christian
198
Th e Secret La ajutage of Film
de Challonge, not a single spectator failed to notice the
splendid microphone that sat in the foreground through
a whole scene. Yet no one had seen it during shooting or
editing.
There are many other instances oi this refusal to see.
One of the most famous is the cable that held Superman
aloft during one of his flights. The very first spectators
saw nothing but this cable, although not a single techni-
cian had noticed it. They had to reshoot the scene in a
hurry.
Another common zone in the work of actor and screen-
writer: I prefer actors whose acting 1 do not see, in whom
talent and skill have given way to a more intimate qual-
ity. 1 don’t like to say: how well he acts! 1 prefer the actor
to draw me closer to him, I prefer to forget he is an
actor and let him transport me— as he himself has been
transported — into another world.
I dislike flamboyance, overworked effects, gim-
mickry, intrusive makeup. The same holds for the
screenplay. And of course the direction. Great art never
shows its seams.
In The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie , Michel
Piccolo who was an old friend of BunucTs, had only
one day of shooting. He played the part of a government
minister.
The scene he appeared in was shot in a natural set-
ting, a gilt-paneled drawing room. Michel Piccoli, wear-
ing a dark suit, had just arrived, and was chatting with
the crew. Bunuel drew me aside and whispered, Just
look at Michel. IPs amazing. He is a minister!
199
J e a n -Cl a u d e C arri e re
It was true. There was a barely perceptible change
in the actor's bearing, look, and smile. Without his know-
ing it, an inner switch had transformed him. An impal-
pable metamorphosis. Where is that switch located? An
eternal mystery.
Watching a film puts a particular kind of memory to
work: a memory for images (settings, faces), of course,
hut above all '‘instant** memory. You have to remember
a film even as you watch it, Otherwise all is lost
Audiences have to see what they are seeing without
forgetting what they have seen. At every step a whole
army oi faculties is wheeled into action. Some spectators
are prodigiously attentive to detail. 1 met one young man
who went to the movies only to spot errors. He found
them in every film.
Special memory exercise: go in halfway through a
filn i , s e e i t to t h e end, s t a r t a ga i r 1 at the beginning, It: a ve .
Then recall, as precisely as possible, the second half.
I recommend this highly for memory training. Per-
haps also for screen writing.
The greater the painter, the harder he makes us work.
The line he proposes to us suggests rather than specifies.
It challenges our eye, obliges us to finish the lines, fill
in the colors. It is open; it changes as we look.
Likewise in cinema. The eye sometimes follows un-
drawn lines that lead it out of the frame. The eye com-
*
The Secret Language oj Film
woman with parted legs. It is like ocean-floor charts that
show rivers flowing in sharply defined beds far beneath
the surface of the sea.
The same holds true for feeling, which gains from
lack of precision, Great movies readily foster ambiguity
ai i d e ve n vag ueness. A look h e re a n d a ge s tu re th e re w i 1 1
say much more about feeling than words can, or at least
will say it differently. Richly drawn characters always
move in an aura of uncertainty. Their behavior is not
mapped out in advance, their reactions are more than
mere formalities— anything can happen. As with paint-
ing, audiences will interpret in their own way what
happens in bodies and on faces, different for each indi-
vidual, each in his own manner absorbing and complet-
ing the character,
A permanent danger in film: simplification, reduc-
tion. Making melodrama out of tragedy. Giving black
hair to traitors, fair hair to the righteous. Daily watering
one s little cliche like a potted plant (the neighbors have
one exactly like it).
The last scene of Cyrano de Bergerac takes place in au-
tumn, The text even says so, specifying falling leaves.
Knowing that the production schedule required this
scene to be filmed in the month of June, director Jean-
Paul Rappeneau had dead leaves stored in dozens of
crates ten months in advance, ready to be strewn over
the set when the time came.
He went even further. At the Spanish siege of Arras,
Cyrano crosses the enemy lines every morning to mail a
letter to Roxane. To afford his character better cover, and
201
/ e a n -Cl a 1 1 d e ( ’ a r r l e re
at the same time conform to historical truth, Rappencau
wanted to shoot the scene in a held of wheat as tall as
wheat used to grow in the seventeenth century. He
found the right seeds, well preserved, at the Museum of
Natural History* In Hungary, where part of the film was
shot, he had them reconstruct a seventeenth-century
coimnonland tract, a wide held made up of several small
ones* One year before shooting, this expanse was sown
with tall wheat. Later, amid splendid breast-high ears,
he shot not only Cvrano's breathless excursions but the
•# r
great battle scene as well,
Priceless — yet unseen — work. But that particular un-
seen quality is the very heart of the image, without
which it would not be what it is.
Another minute detail:
In Bunuel's last film, That Obscure Object of Desire,
the wealthy Fernando Rev calls on a young Spanish girl,
a poor immigrant, who lives with her mother in a dilapi-
dated building in Paris's industrial suburbs*
Tile man climbs a stairway, passes somebody, and
goes on to ring at a door: a very short scene, ten seconds
at most.
The set for this scene was built in the studio. The
day before shooting, I saw set designer Pierre Guffroy
and his assistant busily scraping the walls of the stair-
well, leaving barely visible marks on them. 1 asked Gul-
froy what he was up to*
He said, “The thing is, we re in a little building on
the outskirts of town. The people who live here are im-
migrant workers, often very poor. When they can't pay
202
T h e S e c re t Langua ge o f Fil rn
their rent they sneak out, usually at night. If they can,
they take their furniture along. That furniture scrapes
against the walls and leaves marks. So there you are/’
Signs of human habitation , Astounding research work
by a great craftsman, pushing passion for logical detail to
the frontiers of the imperceptible. A detail, of course,
which no one would notice, but whose absence would
perhaps (however vaguely) be felt.
*'A challenge to common sense, a joke in loathsome taste,
an offense against decency: that is the impression cre-
ated by the authentically modern work/' wrote Michel
Leiris of Manet’s Olympia.
What is still modern about the cinema?
There is something arrogant in the claim that a visual
masterpiece defies the centuries/
After a hundred years of life, film still seems fragile
compared with the traditional arts. Films bum, rot, are
mutilated, fade. Nothing is more complicated than
seeing old films. Apparently durable stock now exists,
which some claim is indestructible.
Will film then lose its first charm (inherited from the
theatre), evanescence? Will it suddenly acquire the inso-
lence of permanence?
Greater accessibility. For more than fifty years, film
seemed a difficult technique, almost beyond amateur
reach. Today everyone makes films, or thinks he does.
T h e S e c re t Langua ge o f Fil rn
their rent they sneak out, usually at night. If they can,
they take their furniture along. That furniture scrapes
against the walls and leaves marks. So there you are/’
Signs of human habitation , Astounding research work
by a great craftsman, pushing passion for logical detail to
the frontiers of the imperceptible. A detail, of course,
which no one would notice, but whose absence would
perhaps (however vaguely) be felt.
*'A challenge to common sense, a joke in loathsome taste,
an offense against decency: that is the impression cre-
ated by the authentically modern work/' wrote Michel
Leiris of Manet’s Olympia.
What is still modern about the cinema?
There is something arrogant in the claim that a visual
masterpiece defies the centuries/
After a hundred years of life, film still seems fragile
compared with the traditional arts. Films bum, rot, are
mutilated, fade. Nothing is more complicated than
seeing old films. Apparently durable stock now exists,
which some claim is indestructible.
Will film then lose its first charm (inherited from the
theatre), evanescence? Will it suddenly acquire the inso-
lence of permanence?
Greater accessibility. For more than fifty years, film
seemed a difficult technique, almost beyond amateur
reach. Today everyone makes films, or thinks he does.
Jean- C l a u d e ( 1 a r r iere
Automatic equipment for amateurs has made the profes-
sionals redundant. Uniform camera settings mean uni-
form images. Which means no more images at all.
Every year thousands of men and women invite their
video camera along on vacation, They keep it stuck to
their faces, so that they themselves see nothing, and that
is how they travel. They show the world to their camera,
which records It
And they forget to travel themselves. Gone are the
sketchbooks you used to see, in which hand and eye —
whether skilled or amateurish — did the selecting.
Letting the camera film means not filming any more.
And no one ever watches these pseudo films, not even
those who made them. For one thing, they don’t have
time to look at therm And it is too late now to see the
world they overlooked while traveling.
Thanks to films (largely made by amateurs) showing
baby grown into a young man, or dear departed grandfa-
ther, film has given a face — for the first time — to aging
and death.
Cinema also exists, necessarily, outside cinemas; it is
part of our daily life, part of how we dress and how we
walk. Less obviously, it has also entered the paintings
we look at (we readily refer to an Old Master’s talent for
centering) and the books we read. How can you avoid
slipping film images between the pages of books?
An unseen film, made up of thousands of film s, has
infiltrated our way of looking at things. A new form
204
Th e S e c re t La ng u a g t o f Fil m
dwells in us, a mobile and probably perishable form,
through which we see the world. A short-lived ghost.
Forms come and go constantly. They are transmitted
without the knowledge of those who use them, and
often without the knowledge ot those who create them.
The camera is a special eye, more different than we real-
ize from our own. Our eye can hit from one object to the
next, skipping intermediary images that are of no use to
it. In a camera there is no such human way of seeing.
The eye is everywhere at once; it is ‘inside things/’ as
the French philosopher Gilles Deleuze said.
Everything which filmmakers put in their films but
we fail to see. Everything which they fail to put in, but
we
do
see.
When he made El, in Mexico, Bonne! began with the
meeting of the two protagonists in a church. He made
one shot of each of them as they looked at one another.
A little later in the film the two characters meet
again, this time in a drawing room somewhere in town.
Here again lie wanted a shot of each of them, so as to
stress in the most traditional style that they were predes-
tined to meet again. Through carelessness, or because of
a tight budget (he could no longer remember), he filmed
only one of the two shots.
At the editing stage he was acutely aware of the ab-
sence of the second shot. Against all the rules, he de-
cided to show in its place the same shot as in the first
scene of the film. In other words, when they are actually
205
/ e an -Cl a u d e C a r r i e r t >
in a social setting, one of the two characters suddenly
finds himself back in the church. Everything about him
is different, even his clothes.
Yet no one noticed. Bunuel even brought three or
four editors together in M exieo City one day and told
them: I m going to show you the first three reels of a
film. In them is a crude mistake. Find it.”
No one spotted it.
Thousands of stories of tins kind are scattered
through the first century of cinema. The eye s strange
capacity for skating over things, seeking to see yet miss-
ing the obvious.
The opposite phenomenon also occurs. In 1992, in
Poland, the filmmaker Jerzy Skolimowski undertook to
direct his first play. His friends tried to convince him
that tli e results were unpromising, that the actors were
clumsily placed and performing badly, and so on. Skoli-
mowski didn’t see this at all. Then he made a video of
his work and viewed it on a screen. His mistakes were
immediately obvious, and he was able to rectify them.
H is eye had grown used to a filmed view of things. He
saw nothing else.
Every form of expression we know — -literature, painting,
music, sculpture — has spawned by-products in swelling
numbers and growing shabbiness, particularly since the
nineteenth century. Film made its appearance at the
busy height of the industrial era, at the very moment
standardization in the manufacture of everyday objects
had carried the day.
206
T h e S e c re t La n g u a g e o f F i l m
It soon fell victim in its turn. There has long been
a cut-rate cinema, a bargain-basement cinema. The
problem is that whatever the end result of the film, its
physical appearance is everywhere the same. Format,
film-stock, and presentation are similar — which makes
it difficult to be selective.
Some people— Francois Truffaut, for instance — have
called television simply a more mediocre version of cin-
ema. 1 believe this is not accurate* As far as the material
form goes, yes. But on television, films made for cinema
are cripples, limping, mutilated in a thousand ways*
Films made for television arc produced faster, with less
care. And when we come to the production-! line TV se-
ries, the decline is obvious at once, even to the dullest
eye*
But there are also good, even very good, television
films. Indeed, some TV series stand comparison with the
great popular novels we ail love.
The opprobrium directed at television, like all op-
probrium, needs tempering*
In the 1960s, certain French magazines were at a loss
what to say about Bunuel, Concerned more with a direc-
tor’s 'handwriting'’ than with the content of his work,
they found it hard to detect any form in BurmeFs films
that might be studied.
A blither source of awkwardness was BurmeFs reso-
lute determination never, never to explain the vvhys and
wherefores of a story* Bunuel openly ridiculed certain
painters, contemporaries of his, who “ write more than
207
/ e a n - C l a u d e C a r r i e re
they paint/ A lofty rejection of self-explanation, which
is usually either disguised self-defense or vainglorious
self-justification.
Here too, the voice of the shadows.
Buhuel's films (and those of a handful of others) are
beyond a doubt more than just films. Perhaps they come
in the form of films only accidentally, in the absence of
another, ideal form, a perfect, active form, “a form not
of art 7
Hence the sovereign and quite unaffected contempt
Luis felt all his life for aesthetic effect, elegant framing,
unusual lighting, musical accompaniment — everything
that helps turn a Him into an object of art. He burst into
that irresistible laugh of his whenever a reporter referred
to his “palette,” or analyzed and classified his close ups
and establishing shots.
Perhaps IkmueFs films are not films, because this
so-called filmmaker was in reality a character of much
broader (some would say monumental) stature. Often
considered in France and elsewhere as a peripheral fig-
ure, a mere “Surrealist/ he is today most solidly im-
planted in the culture of Spain, a granite outcrop
dominating every crossroads. Von can walk around him,
insult him, shrug, even try to blow him to smithereens
(his secret dream). Blit nobody can ignore him. If you are
a contemporary Spanish novelist or musician, or just a
man alive to the voices around you, you can do without
Picasso, who is a painter and nothing but a painter. You
cannot escape Buhuel. Sooner or later your paths will
cross*
A character of boundless resources, lie was by na-
208
T h e S e r re t Lti nguage of Film
tare comfortable with contradictions others would have
found unbearable: a nonartist creating great art; an athe-
ist nurtured on Catholicism; an antibourgeois yet a dis-
creetly (and charmingly) bourgeois bourgeois; and above
all else a Spaniard, the very incarnation of Spain, but a
banished Spaniard, who did the bulk of his work in Mex-
ico City and Paris,
I worked with him for nineteen years, and for me he
is first and foremost — beneath his open, almost innocent
appearance and his liberality — the essence at secre-
tiveness, First of all about himself All his life he rejected
psychology ("arbitrary, useless, restrictive ), refusing to
explain himself, whatever die act in question, as long as
that act struck him as plausible and real and allowed him
to mine deep-buried treasure chambers.
I have always been struck by the two images that
opened and closed his career, the first shot he ever
filmed and the last. The first, still famous, from the start
of Un Chien Andalou, shows a razor slicing the eyeball
of a woman looking into the camera. The last image he
filmed, at the end of That Obscure Object of Desire ,
is of a woman’s hand sewing up a gash in a piece of
bloodstained silk.
He set great store by that image. He even filmed it
again, to improve it, two weeks after shooting was over.
It was indeed his last image, as if fifty years later he
somehow sought to repair that first gaping slash. Be-
tween the two — secrecy, the abyss.
Bufrnel belongs more to Spain than to film historians.
I know how weary he was (“bored to tears,” in fact) of
being likened to Goya — like him an Aragonese, like him
209
/ e a n - C I a u de C a r r i e re
deaf, and like him Frenchified, 'adulterated'’ by France
f afrancesado } — but it is impossible, ev en this soon, not
to compare the two men. Sooner or later, wherever he
may be, Bunuel will have to resign himself to it.
In 1972, George Gukor threw a big lunch in Bunuel' s
honor. He invited me and the producer Serge Silberman.
as well as Raphael, one of Luis's sons.
An impressive guest list: John Ford, Ruben Mamou-
ban, William Wyler, Billy Wilder, Robert Wise, Robert
Mulligan, George Stevens, Cukor himself, and Alfred
Hitchcock (who sat down beside Luis, embraced him,
and talked to him about Tristana and Discreet Charm
throughout the meal). The two men were the same age.
On a television show a few months earlier, asked which
filmmakers he admired, Hitchcock had replied:
Apart from myself, Bunuel,
Hitch cock also spoke of his cellar — his pride and joy
— and its splendid wines. Alas, he could no longer drink:
Bunuel sympathized most sincerely. And he ate only a
small piece of boiled fish, which Cukor had had specially
prepared for him.
Toward the end of lunch, toasts were proposed. Nat-
urally there was much talk of the ' good old days, of the
American production system, of the stupidity of the
major companies, of the thrall dorn of the star system.
George Stevens raised his glass and said, more or less:
’ Despite all that separates us, despite our different
backgrounds, despite our differences of opinion, l drink
to what has brought us together here.
Bunuel had the toast translated for him, raised his
glass and replied:
I drink, but 1 have my doubts. *
210
Recently someone asked, “Will computers make films
one day?”
He was told, “Most certainly. And other computers
will go to see them.
As a child, living in the country, l saw Fritz Lang's
Metropolis. In it l discovered my first city, and fora long
time I believed that every city on earth resembled the
one in the movie— full of muscular men walking with
bowed heads. I also wondered whether certain flesh-
and-blood women didn’t conceal metallic women whose
secret would be revealed only by death at the stake,
We may well spend the greater part of our life look-
ing for the cinema monsters of our childhood. Our first
monsters: unforgettable, like first loves and first thrills.
One of my finest film memories is of seeing Chaplin s
The Great Dictator , soon after the end of the Second
World War, at the Guumont- Palace, then the biggest cin-
ema in Paris,
It was packed. The audience was exultant. 1 have
never known such a strong, clear sense of victory.
Jean-Claude Carrie re
in a bedroom between a man and a woman, even before
the idea of murder arises, Renoir inserts a closeup of a
glittering letter opener lying on the bedsheets.
Abruptly, the frame introduces a third character to
i is. The possibility of crime has entered the picture* We
have seen it. We view the scene with different eyes.
Objects have attitudes and expressions. In their own
way they act and tell stories, Jean Epstein noticed diis
as early as 1926, in his book The Cinematograph Viewed
from Etna:
1 Once upon a time, not so long ago, there was no
American drama without the revolver scene, the weapon
being slowly withdrawn from a half-open drawer. 1 loved
that revolver. It appeared as the symbol of a thousand
possibilities. '
Hence the care filmmakers put into choosing objects,
clothing, accessories, into displaying and lighting them,
A concern inherited from painting and photography, but
compounded in film by the object s place in the story,
I have seen directors audition dogs and monkeys, but
also shoes and bunches of roses.
Jean Epstein also said that when man appeared on film
it was the first time we had seen him through an eye
which was not itself also a human eye — hence the impar-
tial ' confessional power that some attributed to the
novel device.
But this is not quite true. For one thing, photography
had already traveled much of the road film was to take;
and besides, we all know that cameras are sentimental.
212
Th e S e c re t Lang u age o f F i / m
Actors endowed with what is called presence are often
told, “The camera likes you / 5
Epstein called the cinema “a young enigma/'
Roberto Matta tells how he visited Mondrian in New
York one day. As lie entered the studio a woman was
leaving.
Mondrian greeted him and made tea. He was a taci-
turn, solitary, bespectacled man. To Matta — who is him-
self all joy and expamiveness — he seemed moody. Matta
asked him why.
“It's that woman who just left/' said Mondrian. “She
asked me, why do you put all those straight lines in your
pictures?'
When Matta said nothing, Mondrian asked him,
“Well, do you see any straight lines in my pictures,
Matta?
This cautionary tale can doubtless be applied to film.
What does Fellini not see in his films? Or Kurosawa?
Bresson? Stanley Kubrick?
Bunuel was sincerely surprised, even sometimes irri-
tated, when they told him Los Olvidados was a cruel
film. He saw something quite different in it
The storyteller’s is a time-honored role. He tells men
where they come from (we were all born inside a story),
he weaves fables for them and adds a moral, to show
them in his own way how they should behave. He
amuses and teaches them. The storyteller 5 s patron saint
213
/ ean-Cl a u d e C a r r i e re
is the illustrious Scheherazade, in nightly danger of los-
ing her head if the story she conjured up failed to interest
the Sultan. Her life hung on her words. There is no
sharper symbol of the truly capital importance of the
storyteller's art.
Down through the centuries storytellers have used
myth, epic, jokes, riddles, theatre, the novel.
And finally film. The film maker is the heir of the
great storytellers of the past, and the keeper of their
tradition.
In film as elsewhere, the need to tell a story imposes
its own discipline. We have to follow a definite order,
include specific information, present the narrative to the
audience in coherent form. No one is forced to tell a
story, but whoever does so must be aware of the obliga-
tions ahead — -not the illusion of freedom, but rigorous
discipline. Only on the basis of this discipline, bent cm
tirely to the spectator s needs, can the author make room
for his own voice to be heard.
Which stories should we tell? The choice is up to us.
It is in fact our very first duty.
Where should we look? Where should we seek the
indispensable gift? And how should we put it to work?
Any answer has to be tentative. Some people say that
stories are born of abrupt and fleeting shifts in the course
of our lives and our feelings, of ruptures, of shocks, as if
discrete elements that had hitherto slumbered apart from
one another had suddenly been brought together.
But this is not at all certain. The notion of the shock
is certainly appealing (with its connotation of lots being
shaken up before a draw), but we also know of great
Th e S e c re t L a n g u a ge of F i I nt
authors impervious to shock, or at least highly skilled at
concealing their inner turbulence.
Much more convincing is the notion of the story-
teller's kingdom as a kind of fifth or sixth dimension, in
which things would have neither the same substance nor
the same logic as in our own world. It would be com-
posed of a kind of parallel matter made up of neutrinos
—massless, subatomic particles permeating every one of
us, but with varying degrees ol force and insistence. A
kingdom of ambiguity, of contradictions, but above all of
limitless potential, in which thousands of characters and
plots would he available in the space between nothing-
ness and existence. Nor could anyone say what they
we re or we re r i ot. E very th i ng w< n 1 1 d depe i j d u poi i u s .
Tins kingdom has no borders. It figures on no map.
The location of the mine — deep, one hopes, inexhaust-
ible, and renewable — -is unknown. I remember a short
story by Richard Matheson, In it, a man wonders who on
earth dreams up the jokes (always anonymous, generally
off-color) that do the rounds of the world's bars, news-
rooms, and corporations. Obsessed by the question, he
embarks on a long, arduous, dangerous search. Finally,
inside a huge mountain, he finds a kind ol unknown com-
munications center, the mysterious source lie seeks,
where reporters, writers, humorists — people removed
from the world and believed dead— are forced to labor
in secret, Tl le funny stories they invent are then borne
all over the world by teams of talebearers. Hemingway
himself, fleetingly glimpsed, is one of the unwilling
workers.
The object is to hold nations and societies together
215
J e a n - C l a u d e C a r r i e re
with laughter. It is an unsung but essential task. The
storyteller’s task.
And no one is to blame if he fails. As an old Sufi poet
once said:
The nigh f is over, and my story is not done 7
But how may l blame the night for that?
I am struck today by the extraordinary vitality of the
storytelling tradition. A vitality that comes from the re-
motest of pasts. It has even been attributed to cosmic
forces.
Today, perhaps more than ever, we live within the
stories we are told. Which explains the persistence
among French filmmakers of a very hoary fear, the fear
that there are no longer any good screenwriters. It is
a fear that is given regular expression. But behind the
ignorance that such fear betrays (our own screenwriters
are neither better nor worse than others) is a genuine
need, out need to hear stories. It is a permanently unre-
quited need. Every nation in every age has longed for
better stories, fo r stories a re th e s tu fi o f w h i e h p e op ] e ar e
made and in which they recognize and identify them-
selves, They want the stories they hear to be better be-
cause they themselves aspire to be better. We have
never had enough screenwriters. It could not possibly
be otherwise.
There are many other components to our lives. That
goes without saying. We are not made up of stories alone.
But without stories we are nothing, or very little.
Struck by some remarks made by the neurologist Oli-
ver Sacks, author of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for
216
The Secret Language of Film
a Hat , I asked him tor his notion of what a “normal man*'
might be. Sacks hesitated, then answered that a normal
man is — -perhaps— one who is able to tell his own story.
He knows where he came from (he has a past, a function-
ing memory), he knows who he is (his identity), and he
thinks he knows where he is going (he has plans, and at
the end of his plans lies death). He is thus situated in the
flow of a narrative; he is a story.
Should this individual-storv link be shattered, for
whatever mental or physiological reason, that man
would be ejected from time's flow. He would cease to
know anything, to know who he was or what he should
do. He would clutch at the appearances of existence as
at a straw. From a medical standpoint he would be adrift.
His bodily mechanisms would still function, but he
would be lost along the way. He would no longer exist.
Can the same he said for a whole society? Many peo-
ple think so. No longer to be able to tell one s story, to
situate oneself satisfactorily within time, could actually
trigger the disappearance of whole peoples, cut off from
themselves by their memory's failure to regenerate and
keep on regenerating. Cut off from themselves and per-
haps driven mad.
Yet another old tale:
A man listening to stories told by a sage saw that they
were interpreted sometimes in one way, sometimes in
another. What was the point in telling stories, asked the
man, if they were all given such different meanings?
"But that is just what gives them their worth!" an-
swered the storyteller. “How greatly would you value a
217
Jean- C l a u d e C a r r i c ra
cup from which you could drink only water, but no milk?
Or a plate from which you could eat only meat, lout no
lentils? And remember; both cup and plate are of limited
capacity. What then can we say about language, which
promises us an infinitely more copious, richer, and more
varied diet!
For a moment he was silent. Then he went on more
gently:
• he true question is not What is the meaning of
this story? In how many ways ought 1 to understand it?
Can it be reduced to a single meaning?' The question is
Can this person I am speaking to profit from what I am
about to tell him?
218
THE FOG
OF IMAGES
D uring the 1920s, the big Hollywood studios
rebuilt the world. You no longer needed to
travel, either in space or time: the planet was at your
fingertips. You had only to build and to paint. Not since
the vast artists workshops of yesteryear, where camels,
Roman armor, pineapples, and model galleons jostled for
space around Rubens or Titian — immense but essential
mountains of bric-a-brac — -had so many images of this
world been piled up together.
From Intolerance on, no challenge was too great,
Crews built Gothic cathedrals, broke them up after use,
erected in their place Baghdad palaces, and so on. If we
could see the activity on one of those sets speeded up
over a period of a few years it would give us a staggering
image of our own world, chaotic, turbulent, endlessly
destroyed and endlessly rebuilt.
Jea n - C ( a u d e Carr i e re
Their inventiveness of detail sometimes bordered on
the miraculous. T recall, in the original Thief of Baghdad,
the magic carpet s shadow skimming over the city walls:
refinement at the heart of the illusion. The cinema was
an unbelievable image factory, clearly unprecedented in
history* Essence of world, canned and bottled.
In the same period, privileged denizens of this mi-
crocosm — famous actors like Mary Pick ford and Douglas
Fairbanks — enjoyed a fabulous planetwide popularity.
Their journey to Moscow in 1926 was authentic delir-
ium. They were like heroes of legend coming from a
magic land. They seemed immune to human weak-
nesses. When a star like Rudolph Valentino died before
his time, a whole stunned world went into mourning*
Yet these films on which such meticulous care was
lavished were not intended to last. Those flickering
forms knew that the technical progress which had given
them life also doomed them to an early old age*
A film was shot, edited, shown, forgotten.
In the same period, particularly in Europe, an eccen-
tric notion that directly challenged this sense of imper-
manence came into being. The cinema, that vast carnival
attraction, was an art, a new art, seventh in the line, the
‘art of the twentieth century.’ It would swiftly replace
all others, usurping the functions of painting, architec-
ture, music, literature, and of course the theatre, and fi-
nally become a Total art. No one w as ever certain what
Total art” might mean, but an incredible storehouse of
writing on the subject is available* Some even said that
the arts had been progressing and evolving since the
dawn of history solely in order to arrive at the bios-
220
The S e ere t La n g u a ge of F t J rn
coining of film; past centuries, deprived of this ultimate
wonder, were to bo pitied.
But as we all know, reading, concerts, and the opera
are nowhere near their death throes. Never have major
exhibitions of painting attracted so many visitors, never
has theatre seemed so vital and inventive — whereas film
(particularly film considered as an art) is in crisis.
Perhaps the mistake was believing in the possibility
of a kind of universal convergence, believing that the
cinema could toss all known languages into the crucible
of a new language, like peoples joining a federation to
become just one people. The old dream of the single
language, of the supremacy of one form of expression.
But the cinema, a newcomer in already crowded terri-
tory, had on the contrary to find its mark of distinction
(or, to use one of the buzzwords of our age, its differ-
ence)* Its universal popularity obscured its distinctive
nature, as well as its limits. It drew unheard-of crowds
and created new forms of worship, but it was just another
medium entering the field — and compelled, moreover,
to elbow its way in*
Where does it stand today, on the verge of its hun-
dredth birthday? 1 don't know. No one knows. On the
one hand it still seems to he wildly self-congratulatory.
No other form of human expression celebrates itself with
such pomp and energy. Everywhere there are festivals,
conferences, seminars, clubs, museums, award ceremon-
i e s w ate h e d by mil I i on s ■ they g o 1 1 an d i n h a n d w i t h p rc >-
longed waves of nostalgia (for beyond a doubt the
cinema has had a golden age), as well as the whiff of
smoke from its own funeral pyres.
22 /
J e a n -Clan de C a rri e re
On the other hand we have the crisis , the good old
shrin king-audience crisis I have been hearing about for
the past thirty years. Although it is. of course, the crisis
of just one kind of film— film projected in movie houses.
But all of us see more and more films, only we see them
in other ways, on television, on cassette, in airplanes, in
certain trains, soon perhaps in the rear seats of our cars.
We are close to envisaging personalized screenings — on
special goggles, on the insides of helmets: developments
that will make it possible to watch a film anywhere, on
the beach or in the subway, the way a Walkman permits
solitary listening.
And movie houses themselves are fighting back on
every front, acquiring superb projection equipment, far
superior now and in the foreseeable future to present TV
sets. Theatres are even adopting new processes, Omni-
max, wraparound vision, sixty-frame -per- second projec-
tion. The outcome of the technical war is still very much
in the balance. Audience interaction has invaded audito-
riums, triggering fine brawls among spectators (it was
designed to do just that), Soon, thanks to laser-scanned
videodiscs, the cinema will compete with television in
its own backyard, the home* Our apartments will turn
into movie houses, multi screened if we so wish; we will
live inside image- walls with image- furniture and ghost-
fittings made of holographic images. In a science-fiction
setting of this kind (which we would be right to call
nightmarish, the more so because these objects and fur-
nishings would he literally beyond our grasp), we might
invite Napoleon and Marlene Dietrich, in the form of
synthetic images, to have a cup of holographic tea, lis-
tening the while to Caruso and Billie Holiday — who, if
222
Th e S e c re t L a n g u a g e o f F i I m
we wished, could also attend in clear, convincing, and
even tangible form.
We will be able (indeed, we already are able, thanks
to ever-improving synthetic images) to usher real actors
into nonexistent trains. With the help of outlandish
equipment, still cumbersome and high-priced but bound
to shed weight, we will be able to enter our computers,
thus overturning all our viewpoints, our ideas, our con-
ceptions of matter, and f rolic at leisure in a mathematical
garden*
There is more: we can (if we are clever enough) de-
vise scenarios bringing together all the great performers
of our youth, or even of remoter times, preserved in syn-
thetic form. We will he able to introduce Greta Garbo to
Humphrey Bogart in our homes, in settings to suit us,
and — for once — have them act together. We will even be
able to act along with them, speak to them, get to know
them*
We cai i a 1 ready 1 i 1 ake I o ve w i th a 1 ion ex is te nt won i ui \
whose fragrance, skin, and intimate warmth we will feel
despite her nonexistence. Within a few years we will be
able to select the face, body, and voice of this woman
from models offered by the agents of this new form of
prostitution* Given a few ingredients, wo will be able to
manufacture our own models, pick Marlene’ s legs, Mari-
lyn's bosom, and so forth.
We will be able to do a lot, perhaps even too much.
As their name suggests, movies keep moving. Today
more than ever. The cinema's path is never well marked.
It has had to blaze a trail through mirage.
To be truthful, the experience of virtual reality, the
appearance of new worlds at our command in whose
223
! e a n - ( 1 1 1 u d e C ’ a r r i e re
midst we move with our thoughts and our feelings, all
this poses another question: is this still cinema? What
exact meaning do we even give to the word "'cinema/'
which means different things in different languages?
Can we even think historically about “the cinema”?
I doubt it. We already try much too hard, brandishing
balance sheets and forecasts. Attempting to turn some-
thing into history es paralyzing if that something is one
of life's currents. The cinema is everything but the past.
But are we beginning, despite its dazzling technical
possibilities, to perceive that its powers are not so lim-
itless as we had believed? Instead of expanding forever,
could cinema's range actually be shrinking, almost with-
out our knowledge, because of its unavoidable depen-
dence on the physical nature of film? Has it come full
circle in its hundred years? Or has the whole of this past
century merely been its infancy? To reduce it to a single
question: is cinema young or old?
Questions for today as for tomorrow. Impossible
to answer them; otherwise they would no longer be
questions.
Technical improvements are simply part of the nor-
mal course of tilings; they have never meant that an art
form was making "p^gress.” That word is meaningless,
yet it is a trap into which we regularly fall. How often do
we read or hear: "We have come a long way since the
days when filmmakers couldn't , . / or else; 'Very soon
the movies will finally be able to . . .
No, We confuse things: fashion and taste, evolution
and progress. Even period and every people has its own
way of saying things, and the bulk of what we produce is
swept into oblivion. This fate awaits us all. It is impos-
224
Th e S e c re i L a n g u age of F i l m
sible to foretell what will survive of our time (always
supposing anything at all survives). Everything, all the
time, has to he started afresh. Everything, including the
cinema. It is neither dead nor gloriously alive. Whatever
future forms it assumes, however attractive they may
seem to us, it is neither enthroned in permanent splen-
dor nor fated for imminent demise. Like everything else,
it is in motion, and in danger.
At a filmmakers conference in Los Angeles two or
three years ago, someone put the usual question to me:
has ' technical progress” been good for cinema? Will the
medium change as a result?
i indulged myself by making up a story where some-
one asks Flaubert whether the replacement of the goose
quill by the steel nib had changed literature. I made
Flaubert (may he forgive me) reply, 1 don't think so.
But it has changed life for geese.
All “technical progress” has to go baud in hand with
loss. In the case of die goose quill what was lost was a
suppler, more personal, more animal contact with paper,
riot to mention the whiteness of the feather, the beguil-
ing irregularities of its point, the application required.
The craftsman grows used to the imperfect tool. In
the end he finds charm in it, in the very efforts it obliges
him to make. Often we abandon it with regret, like a
familiar piece of clothing whose worn fabric we found
soothing. All painters have loved “accidents” of drafts-
manship.
On the other hand, we willingly succumb to heady
lie w found facility. It blinds us to all else; we believe
the problem solved (without wondering which problem).
We even wonder how on earth we ever managed to live
Jean- C hi u d e C a rri e re
and work without this admirable discovery. And we re-
main virtually blind to the essential: our dearth of real
invention* our miserably repetitious ideas, our very com-
monplace stories.
Too widespread* too trite: the image is waning. Fading
into what surrounds it what precedes it, what follows it.
What is an image which we no longer see?
Ibis eclipse of the visual is an already perceptible
phenomenon, it horrifies advertisers, Nobody foresaw it.
And it is the area in which our future is probably being
decided.
Let us think back to the images, all of them inani-
mate, which a sixteenth-century householder had at his
disposal: three or four prints and a few canvases on his
walls; some pious faces in his book of hours; stained-
glass windows in churches and public places*
In quantitative terms, very little, Qualitatively, hard
to measure. I live, but outside myself,’ said many of
the mystic poets, who saw a very great danger in this
theft of oneself, and saw as well the true kingdom in the
inner image.
To what extent today are we emptied, robbed,
sucked out of ourselves by the images that assail our
every waki ng m on i en t?
How can we escape them? How to select one or two,
preserve and store them? Imbue them with new
strength?
How, if you are a filmmaker today, do you create a
visible image?
226
Th e S ec re t La n g ti a g e a f F i ( tit
* * *
We might also wonder — we do it too rarely — about what
cinema may have transformed within ourselves, how it
may have changed that unseen form which dwells in
each of us and which we constantly strive to adapt to
the world. That form through which we see the world,
through which, as the philosophers say, we somewhat
fearfully apprehend it.
Sometimes, in fools and fanatics of all kinds, this
form is fixed, congealed. Whether they are paralyzed by
political or aesthetic ideologies, by religious teachings,
by personal convictions, the world can bounce off them
and they never turn a hair* They see it through the bars
they cling to. Cinema has no hope ol moving them, or at
least not outwardly.
In others the form is supple and even variable, eager
to adapt to the uncertainties of the real, to our illusions
and contradictions. For such people— true seekers, alert
travelers — the cinema s contribution is probably sub-
stantial. Its influence can extend to our external behav-
ior, to our inner awareness, to our most hidden fantasies.
At certain moments of our lives, for each of us, inevita-
bly, cinema has given specific shape to (and has even
awakened) our sexual curiosity, introduced us to the
pleasures of movement, of speed, of time-travel. It has
given us the disturbing itch for power, for sometimes
brutal domination, lor murder and wav. I t has exposed us
to the fascination of physical strength, gleaming muscles,
disproportionate, supernatural power. It has renewed
our heroes and our monsters, our whores and our
227
/ e a n - C I a it d e C a r r i e re
madonnas. In its flight its wings have brushed all our
daydreams, uncovered all our hopes and vices.
Do we know ourselves better than we did before the
birth of film? Clearly nobody (unless enormously arro-
gant) can sav. We know ourselves differently. After a
hundred years of moving images and sounds, our surface
is no longer the same, Beneath that surface it is harder
to tell. We can no more deny the existence of the cinema,
both outside and inside us, than we can deny the air we
breathe* It is in everyone’s baggage. It has penetrated
us, neglecting no area that could possibly be explored*
Some filmmakers have even looked beyond everyday
concerns, not just for a way of life but for a reason to live.
To unite a story told in pictures with a deep questioning
of life — that has been the enduring dream of the Japa-
nese masters. Perhaps, unlike Westerners, they were
unburdened by the weight of dusty centuries of meta-
physical systems. Whatever the reason, the Japanese
have elevated our peepshovv to the place we least ex-
pected to see it, to the domain of thought, of philosophy.
And the Japanese were not alone. Bergman and Fellini
can also he numbered among our century’s philosophers.
They show t is their time, which is also ours, and the
mirror they hold up to us always contains some surprises
about ourselves,
To what extent has the cinema changed our inner
form, and in consequence our relations with the world?
Are these changes hereditary? It is impossible to say. No
doubt it varies from one individual to another. Even
today some families forbid their children to watch televi-
sion, In a way this is understandable. Thousands of
hours are thus saved from passivity, from stultification.
T h e S e < 1 r e t L a nguag e o j l f ilm
and turned to better use. But who can say what these
chi Id re n may have failed tc ) act i ui re ? YV 1 1 at w i I ] they I ack ,
compared to other children?
An otl i v r < juest ion : tes ts have apparent! y proved that
fetuses in their mothers’ wombs are sensitive to the mu-
sical signature-tunes of certain TV programs. When ex-
posed to this soothing music in the weeks following their
birth, they recognize it and are lulled to slumber. Are
they not then also sensitive to the crackle of gunfire, the
screech of tires, the terrified screams of women in dan-
ger? And do these very ordinary sounds from the audio-
visual world, frequently heard even before they are
born, warn them of the brutality of the world they must
enter, like it or not, in a few weeks’ time?
How film has shaped us, and daily continues to shape
us, we don’t really know. Beyond a doubt, though, we
should ask ourselves the question and not ignore it, even
if the answer is lost somewhere in the darkness within
us. Like every experience of the world, film brings us
back face to face with ourselves. We thought cinema was
outside us, whereas it clings to us like a skim We had
assumed cinema was mere entertainment, but it is part
and parcel of what we wear and how we behave, of our
ideas, our desires, our terrors.
When we return to our inner theatre, we realize how
destitute we are, how little we know about ourselves.
In the kind of knowledge that matters, we are by defi-
nition ignorant, routinely blind. Millions and millions
of images send us scrambled reflections of ourselves.
Where are we? Which vision oi us is the most accurate?
Nothing is really certain. And we are ourselves that
uncertainty.
229
/ e an- C I a u d e C arri e re
* * ^
No doubt those African dignitaries who closed their eyes
to sacrilegious intrusion sensed a danger — the loss of
self. The danger of being taken, of vanishing into those
external images. By lowering their lids, perhaps they
sought to shield themselves against that threatened loss
of self
Yet at the same time they were denying themselves
a pleasure, a form of knowledge. And we face the same
choice.
In a wonderful passage. Amadou Hampate-Ba de-
scribes how in the 1930s he urged his mother to go to
the cinema and keep her eyes open. Very pious, highly
reluctant, she finally complied. She sat through a French
film from beginning to end, went home without speaking
a word, and all night long remained shut in her room.
He r son did not see her again until next day. She then
told him, very calmly, after her long hours of reflection,
that a people capable of creating those human forms
could not have done anything wicked. On the contrary.
In the old African woman’s opinion, they had even risen
toward the power and beauty of God.
Let us stop there, on that distant night of meditation
and its radiant morning. Let that divine reference guide
us through the confusion we live in. Let us be as wary of
enthusiasm as of skepticism. Let us keep both a hot and
a cool head. Let us never lose the desire to do or to see
what others have done— but to see it properly, so that
our eye extends and enlarges the screen instead of
shrinking and scrambling it.
230
T h e S e c re t L a n g u age of F i I m
And finally, let us never forget that language, of
whatever kind, is inherently deceptive. Poets have long
been wary of it. The Persian Mowlana spoke of the "mist
of speech ’ that shrouds true reality. To this mist of
speech, the twentieth century has added the clamorous
fog of images I have been trying to discuss. Fog piled,
alas, upon fog! And filmed images (precisely because
film looks so perfect, because it doesn’t look like a mask)
are perhaps the most deceptive of all the masks we set
upon reality’s face.
And yet, when a film takes complete hold oi us, im-
age s w e k n o w to be I a I s e ea n 1 e ad us to a s u pe r i o r re a 1 i t y ,
stronger, sharper, and finally more real than reality itself.
So let us be guided by artifice and borne on illusion
— just so long as we are not completely taken in. Which-
ever side of the image we happen to be on — whether as
filmmakers or film viewers — we have in common this log
which enfolds and inhabits us. From time to time it lifts
and is pierced by shafts of light. Then it rolls in again.
And yet, whether light or fog, the filmed image so far
constitutes the only victory we have ever won over
death. Film is a continuation of life, with the appearance
of life prevailing over the appearance of death. We live
forever with our ghosts.
The physical quality of these ghosts constantly im-
proves. One day perhaps they will sit down to table with
us, get into bed with us. One day we will marry ghosts.
And the fact that ghosts notoriously cling to their
places of origin (hoary Highland castles, for example)
231
/ c a n- C land e C a r ri e r p
gives us one more good reason for continuing to manu-
facture our own.
N o doubt that was what the old Africans feared: inva-
sion by al ien (and perhaps living) forms, bent on taking
possession of them. Necessarily dangerous ghosts in
wh i eh (uni ike 1 1 am pate- B & s mothe r after h e i s leepl ess
night) they fail to recognize the marks of a new creation.
232
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jean -Claude Carrier© is the president of FEN MS,
France's only film school. He has written screen-
plays for more than fifty films, including The Dis-
creet Charm of the Bourgeoisie , The Tin Drum,
The Unbearable Lightness of Being y The Return
of Martin Guerre ? and Cyrano de Bergerac, a
dozen plays, and many hooks*
I
Advance comments on The Secret Language of Film
“Jean-Claude Carriere is a camera. 1 iis crystal-clear lens brings
the mysteries of cinema into pin-sharp focus, expressing its
secrets in stereoscopic relief. Watch this screen!"
Pete k Brook
“Not many filmmakers in the world have the insight, experi-
ence, and results ofJean-Claude Carriere. This book is a must
for anybody who enjoys movies or is tempted to make one. "
Milos Forman
“Carriere is one of the most important European film and
theatre writers of the last quarter century. .. with invalu-
able insights into the workings of two geniuses: Luis Bunuel
and Peter Brook."
n a n i i i Mayer Selzni c; k
\
5 2 3 0 0 >
9 *780679 421 160
ISSN D-bVT-MSllb-S