FONTE: https://archive.org/stream/screenwritingthesequenceapproachpauljosephgulino/Screenwriting%20The%20Sequence%20Approach%20-%20Paul%20Joseph%20Gulino_djvu.txt
URL: https://archive.org/stream/screenwritingthesequenceapproachpauljosephgulino/Screenwriting%20The%20Sequence%20Approach%20-%20Paul%20Joseph%20Gulino_djvu.txt

Contents
Acknowledgments
Author's Note
Foreword
IX
xi
xiii
i
An Introduction to Sequences
1
Why Sequences?
1
The Origin of Sequences
3
How A Screenplay Works
4
How Sequences Work
12
2
Toy Story. Firing on All Eight
20
3
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
41
4
Double Indemnity: Flashback to the Future
64
5
Fellini’5 Nights ofCabiria: Nocturnal Episodes
80
6
North hy North-vrest. T700 Miles in Nine Sequences
97
7
Lawrence of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an
Intermission
114
8
The Graduate: Passive Main Character
145
9
One Flew Over the Cnckoo-s Nest Midpoint Reversal
158
10
Air Force One: Eight Sequences Eight Miles Up
172
11
Being John Malkovich: The Disappearing Lead Actor
182
12
The Fellowship of the Ring: The Shotgun Approach
199
Sources
225
Index
227
— VII —
Foreword
It begins with an idea, an idea that gnaws, that haunts, that spills into
the quiet moments, and refuses to go away. With nurturing, the idea
grows. It finds purchase in a fertile imagination and unfurls itself, open¬
ing into its very own world, Characters arrive. Sometimes they step out
of the mist of the mind fuUy formed, other times they’re lumps of clay
that must be sculpted. You can’t wait to give them voice. You can't wait
to tell their tale.
Then comes the terror of the blank page. If youYe a beginning
screenwriter you ask, “How do 1 fill 120 pages?” If youYe a seasoned
profession^] you ask, “How do 1 contain my story to only 120 pages?”
And no matter who you are, you ask, “How do I make it good?” It’s
enough to send you running to Starbucks for non-fat latte and an after¬
noon of procrastination,
I arrived at the University of Southern California's Graduate Screen-
writing Program in the Fad of 1990 with a head full of stories and no
idea how to write a screenplay. I’d read most of the popular scieenwrit-
ing books and had written a couple of lousy scripts where ever)yhing
happened in the right place but nothing see3ned to matter. Luckily, at
use, I learned the craft of screenwriting from one of the form's master
educators;, Frank Daniel, who designed the program's curriculum
around the sequence method.
On the surface, the sequence method may appear to be just another
formulaic, by-the-numbers approach to structuring your script. Noth¬
ing could be further from the truth, Instead of providing a dead struc¬
ture, sequencing helps writers create the cl)mamic, dramatic engines that
drive their stories forward. And unlike other popular approaches to
screenwriting, the sequence method focuses on how the audience will
experience the story and what the writer can do to make that experience
better. Sequencing gives writers the clarity to understand and manipu-
— XIII —
Foreword
xiv
late dramatic tension to maximum effect, playing off the audience’s ex-
pectatrons and controlling its hopes and fears.
The sequence method doesnT just make a screenplay better- it also
a” til'“ a 1
and drive, and illuminate which scenes are dramatically necessaiy and
ections, and provides an easy to follow dramatic road map that helps
writers avoid the typical second-act morass.
from a master teacher at USC, Paul Gulmo has now
cornmitted to paper and ink in this remarkably helphil volume In it
Jnk ''' introduction not
them if ®^q^“ces, but also to the theory that underlies
mT storytelling. Further, he has provided concrete
Jstration of the use of these theories in the insightfiil, detailed analysis
of several sigmhcant feature films. In this, he echoes Frank Daniel's no-
Ind'*tlf?i " t^^^hers are the masters of the form,
»d Sit of “““'-r
I am much indebted to Frank Daniel, my instructors at USC and
he sequence method for making me a better storyteller and a better
when did for me. Over the course of my career, I’ve discovered that
^en I employ the sequence method, my screenplays turn out well
^Vhen I ve strayed . . . well, so have my screenplays
^Andrew W. Marlowe
1
An Introduction
to Sequences
Why Sequences?
The great challenge in writing a feature-length screenplay is sustaining
audience emotional involvement from page one through 120. Most
writers can dash off a ten- or hfteen-minute script with little planning;
as the length stretches to an hour or more, it becomes difficult both to
conceive a script in its entirety and execute the individual scenes at the
same time. Most professional writers use various tools to solve this
problem—writing a treatment, outline, step outlines beat sheet; or using
file cards. The function of all of these is to allow writers an overall view
of their work while they toil away at the specific scenes,
The division of a feature film into acts—commonly three acts nowa¬
days, corresponding generally to the setup, development, and resolu¬
tion—-is likewise a way for ■\yriters to divide the vastness of 120 pages
into digestible pieces that can Be attacked indhfidually, without the need
to be mindful of the overall work.
Even in using the three-act approach, though, navigation through a
screenplay can be difficult. Most commonly, the first act is understood
to occupy the first thirty pages, the second act the next sixty, and the
third act the final thirty. For most writers, it is the sixty pages of the
second act—the true heart of the script—that present the greatest chal¬
lenges, a bewildering descent into a swamp of seemingly limitless
— i —
2
SCREENWRiTING
Introduction to Sequences
choices, replete with the perils of wrong turns down dead ends and
quicksand frona which the writer cannot extricate the story.
The use of sequences is an important tool that is often overlooked in
handling this problem. A typical two-hour film is composed of se¬
quences—eight- to fifteen-minute segments that have their own inter¬
nal structure—in effect, shorter films built inside the larger film. To a
significant extent, each sequence has its own protagonist, tension, rising
action, and resolution —just like a film as a whole. The difference be¬
tween a sequence and a stand-alone fifteen-minute film is that the con¬
flicts and issues raised in a sequence are only partially resolved within
the sequence, and when they are resolved, the resolution often opens up
new issues, which in turn become the subject of subsequent sequences.
The advantage of understanding that a feature film is composed of a
series of shorter films is that it mitigates the problem of a seemingly
amorphous second act. Tn general, a two-hour film will have two fifteen-
minute sequences in the first act, four in the second, and two more in
the third. Variations on this arrangement can be seen in many films,
mostly in the length of the sequences and sometimes in their number,
but as a tool for planning and writing a feature film this approach can
be very valuable.
In the pages that follow I will explore the notion of sequences in de¬
tail—their historical origins, how they are defined and how they func¬
tion to make a screenplay fulfill its most basic task: engaging a reader/
viewer. Since understanding sequences requires understanding of some
basic principles of storytelling, I will also examine these, with an eye
toward the question of how a screenplay goes about engaging an audi¬
ence. I will then explore eleven films representing a wide variety of styles
and time periods and show how sequences function within each.
Academically, the sequence approach to feature-length screenwriting
was taught at Columbia University in the early eighties, and has been
taught for the last decade at the University of Southern California and
more recently at Chapman University. Its use as a teaching tool grew
out of the experiences of Frank Daniel (1924-1996), the inaugural dean
of the American Film Institute and later the head of the film programs
at Columbia University and USC, who found that teaching the three-
act approach to screenwriting resulted in the difficulties discussed
above, and so resurrected the notion of sequences to help students write
more successful screenplays, One of the films analyzed in this volume.
Air Force One, was rvritten by Andrew W. Marlowe, who Learned of the
technique while studying at USCT Graduate Screenwriting Program.
In putting this approach down in book form for the first time, my
hope is this simple truth—that big films are made out of little films—
can be of help to others in conceiving and writing a feature-length
screenplay.
The Origin of Sequences
In the beginning was the sequence.
Or more properly, the one-reeler. With the advent of projection of
movies in 1897, the celluloid carrying the images was wound up around
spools that could hold about a thousand feet. At 18 frames per second,
these lasted between ten and fifteen minutes.
By the early 1910s, for reasons both artistic and economic, films were
extended beyond one reel. Because most theaters only had one projec¬
tor, this required the projectionist to stop the projector, swap reels, and
start the show again, during which time the audience waited in the dark
or, more typically, was regaled by intervals of Live entertainment.
Artistically, filmmakers dealt with this interval by making sure the
films had a fade-out at the end of the first reel and a fade-in at the start
of the second—often marked with a title noting the End of Act I and
“Start of Act II/—which in turn required that the narrative be adapted
to conform to the constrictions imposed on it by this interruption. This
was particularly necessary when—as happened early in the feature film
era (1913-1920), the films were sometimes shown in installments—one
or two reels at a time over the coarse of several weeks (much like a serial
or modern-day daytime TV drama series) rather tlian all during the
same evening. Each reel thus had to have its own Integrity.
Some screenwi'iting manuals of the time advised writers to structure
their work around this division into reelsF By the late 1920s, with the
full-length feature film coming to dominate the cinema, most theaters
had Two projectors, and thus the viewing experience became essentially
seamless. In this context, formal and rigorous adherence to writing for
each reel became unnecessary, but the structure persisted, evidenced by
1. Ben Brewster, ‘'Traffic in Souls: An Experiment in Feature-Length Narra¬
tive Construction,” Cimma Jounml 31, Flo. J> Fall 1991, p. 39. Brewster cites
articles by Epes WmtErop Sargent in The Movk Picture World (22 June 1912
and 24 February 1912), and Sargent’s manual Technique of thePhotopIay, 2d ed.
(New York; Moving Picture "World, 1913), p. 121-24.
4
SCREENWRITING
the organization of screenplays into sequences identified by letter (A, B,
C, etc.), a practice that lasted into the 1950s.
If the notion of writing in sequences played a role in feature film
vcriting for the decade and a half after 1913, the craft of screenwriting
underwent a dramatic change starting in 1927, which saw the advent of
the talking picture. Till then, writers had only to script physical action
and title cards. With this new innovation, they had to write dialogue,
and Hollywood producers turned to the experts to solve the problem—
the thriving community of playwrights working on Broadway, which
pulled the craft more firmly into the three-part structure first ex¬
pounded upon by Aristotle (360-322 BC). The result was an eight-
sequence structure married to three acts.
In fact, the underlying structure—eight sequences in a feature
film—persists to this day. long after its origins and practice have been
forgotten. Rather like Monsieur Jourdan in MoliereT The Bourgeoise
Gentleman who is shocked to realize he's been speaking prose for forty
years without knowing it, feature film screenwriters continue to struc¬
ture their films in sequences—and can get into trouble when they don't.
The persistence of this arrangement suggests that something deeper
is at work than the somewhat accidental arrival of cinema with 1,000-
foot reels. The notion of a feature film having eight parts is, like all else
in dramatic theory, tied to human physiology. Drama has been a one-
and-a-half to three-hour experience for 2,500 years. Apparently, beyond
that length, people become restless and uncomfortable, and attention
suffers.
The division of two hours into sequences of ten to fifteen minutes
each also most likely speaks to the limits of human attention, i.e., with¬
out the variation in intensity that sequences provide, an audience may
find itself fatigued or numb rather than enthralled by what is on screen.
How A Screenplay Works
This book puts forward and articulates the division of feature films into
eight segments. Many discussions of screenwriting begin either with Ar¬
istotle's influential work The Poetics or Syd Field's more recently influ¬
ential work Screenplay (1979), which articulate different ways of
dividing up a dramatic work. Aristotle described tragedy as a “whole
action,” and, to him, a whole is that which has a 'Beginning, middle
and end.” This is the first formulation of drama in three parts, and
In troduction to Sequences
5
though he also further broke down tragedy into five parts { prologue,
“episode,” “exode,” “parados” and “stasimon”) the first three roughly
corresponded to the beginning, middle, and end, while the latter trvo
were inserted in the middle, marking where the chorus entered and then
sang odes. . r i
Syd Field’s book described a tltree-act division of screenplays as be¬
ginning,” “confrontation,” and “resolution,” separated by “turning
points,” and, though he did not originate the notion of thinking of
screenplays in terms of acts, the popularity of his book has helped make
the “three act structure” the most common model. Other screenwiting
manuals that have been published since 1979 espouse the notion of
three acts, and give various insights into what they mean and the func¬
tion they play in writing the screenplay.
Variations exist, of course. Kristin Thompson, in her thoughtful and
informed book Storytelling in the New Hollywood [1999), studied over a
hundred films from the 1910s to the 1990s and discerned in them what
might he considered four acts, not three (which she terms setup,
“complicating action,” “development” and “climax”). David Bordwell,
in Narration in the Ftctton Film (1985), described six parts of what he
calls the 'canonical’ story format: “Introduction of setting and charac¬
ters,” “explanation of a state of affairs,” “complicating action,” "ensu¬
ing events,” “outcome,” "ending.
While much insight is to be gained from these books, aspiring writers
may understandably get the mistaken impression that the task of the
writer consists primarily in following theorists’ notions or recommen¬
dations, and, failing to do so, they wUl fail.
There was. of course, a group of extremely successful playwrights
who did not base their work on Aristotle’s Poetics, or any other known
guide or manual of dramatic writing^this group includes Sophocles,
Aeschylus, Aristophanes, and Euripides—the playwrights of Greece s
Golden Age of drama—whose plays constituted the body of work that
Aristotle studied in order to generate his treatise. And of course for
most of the history of movie nyaking, writers did not have access to Syd
Fields’s book, and, indeed, screenwriting manuals were comparatively
rare during Hollywood’s own “Golden Age of the 1930s and L940s.
While the playrsnights who flourished before Aristotle, and the
screenwriters who did so Ijefore Field, worked within the framework of
specific conventions and formulae, their basic task can be understood
in a way that is more empowering to the writer and more helpful to her
in realizing her vision than aiming to conform to a formula and con¬
necting its dots.
6
SCREE.NWRJTING
An Introduction to Sequences
7
In his 1927 study Aspects of the Novel, E. M. Forster (1879-1970)
described somewhat caustically the root nature of story; Nt has only
one merit, that of making the audience want to know what happens
next. And conversely it can only have one fault: that of making the audi¬
ence not want to Imow what happens next.’'^
A decade earlier, in his book Playmaking (1912), theater critic and
theorist William Archer (1856-1924), wrestling with the issue of what,
ultimately, constitutes the essential characteristic of drama, came to the
following conclusion: ‘‘The only really valid definition of the ‘dramatic’
is: any representation of imaginary personages which is capable of inter¬
esting an average audience assembled m a theater/’^
As to motion pictures, Kristin Thompson has said the following of
the emergence of Hollywood as a world leader in the film industry by
1916: “The techniques of continuity editing, set design, and lighting
that were developed during this era were designed not only to provide
attractive images but also to guide the audience attention to salient nar¬
rative events from moment to moment/’'^
These are three very wide open statements about the nature of the
storyteller’s task. Their common thread is focus on the audience. All
successful plays and films have been successful first, before considering
any other positive attributes they might have, in engaging an audience
in this way, and if they did not succeed in this task, they either did not
survive, or can be found in the discount bin at Blockbuster. And need¬
less to say, if a screenplay does not succeed in the task of keeping a
reader or producer wondering what will happen next, it will suffer a fate
even worse—remanded to the reject pile, never to see the light of the
projection bulb or the video screen.
A writer who understands this as the basic task—keeping the audi¬
ence attention on what comes next—is free to go about it in any way her
imagination and inventiveness allows. If a writer realizes that whatever
patterns or rules she encounters in dramatic theory or in screemvriting
manuals (including this one) are to be understood as tools to this end,
she will be empowered to employ them in more interesting ways than
are possible than when seeking to adhere to “rules” or a formula above
all else.
2. E. M. Forster, Aspects of ihe Novel (New York: HarvesC/HBJ, 1927), p. 27.
3. William Archer, Play-Making: A Manual of Craftsmanship (Boston: Small
Maynard & Co., (1912), p. 32.
4. Kristin Thompson, Storytelling in the New Hollywood (Cambridge: Har¬
vard University Press, 1999), p. 1.
During the course of the analyses that follow, I will in fact examine
films that used various combinations of the tools to achieve this end of
audience engagement, Included in their number are some that may
seem quite unconventional in their approach, but they all have in com¬
mon success in engaging an audience.
A successful screenplay, then, is a living thing, in the sense that it
“works” to create anticipation in a reader, as opposed to being an inert
combination of ink, three-holed paper, and brads. The question is: how
does it work? This question must be answered before an understanding
of sequences can be undertaken, because what applies to features also
applies to sequences.
While dramatists and screenwriters have used a variety of techniques
over the years, there are, in the main, four basic tools that have been
employed successfully to keep the audience attention directed into the
future. In order of ascending significance, these Big Four are:
Telegraphing. This is also known as pointing or advertising. It consists
of telling the audience explicitly what would happen in the future of the
narrative. A verbal example could be one character saying to another
“Meet me at Jerry’s Juiceteria at five o’clock” (this is an example of an
appointment, one form of telegraphing), A visual example of telegraph¬
ing would be a character preparing his motorcycle for a ride. Both sug¬
gest the direction the story is going. Both help solve one of cinema s
challenges—its selectivity —what is seen on screen is only a small part of
the action. If the audience is told someone is going to meet someone
else at a juice bar, we can cut to the juice bar without confusing the
audience or providing exposition in the scene explaining to the audi¬
ence why we’re suddenly there.
This tool can also be used as “false” telegraphing—telling the audi¬
ence where the story is going and then paying it off in the reverse. A
character who makes arrangements to see a Broadway show with his
mother but instead gets kidnapped is an example of this, yielding a sur¬
prise twist. The surprise twist has been a staple of cinema from its first
decades, and such tv\dsts only work if the audience is made to anticipate
something. A character getting kidnapped in the opening shot of a
movie can never be a surprise twist, because no expectation has yet been
created,
Another type oFtelegraphing is known as a deadline or ticking clock.
An example of this would be one character telling another: “You have
till midnight Friday to bring tlie Duke back.” It not only tells the audi-
8
SCREENWRITING
/\n Introduction to Sequences
9
ence where the story is going, but it can also put a character under time
pressure, which intensifies the audience’s emotional involvement.
Although telegraphing is used mosdy as part of the support system
of the narrative flow of a story, it has been used in a more profound
way. In American Beauty (1999), just after the opening titles, Lester
Burnham announces in a voice-over narration, “In a year Ill be dead.”
This (literal) deadline instantly creates anticipation and gives shape to
the story. Much later in the picture, Lester informs the audience, 'In a
week ril be dead,” and later still, 'Today is the last day of my life.” 1
suspect that without these three critical lines of dialogue, audience en¬
gagement would be jeopardized, for the film has litde else to propel au¬
dience attention into the future.
Dangling Cause. This tool carries more emotional freight than tele¬
graphing. In the first decade of the twentieth century, Hollywood films
came to be dominated by a narrative model consisting of a series of
events linked by cause and effect. A man asks a woman to marry him
(cause), and she accepts or rejects him (effect). With the evolution of
longer films in the 1910s came the development of the ‘'dangling
cause”—a cause that would not have its effect untO later—it would, in
effect, “dangle” in the audience’s mind while other events intruded, For
instance, a man vows to ask a woman to marry him, but does not do so
until the next scene or until several scenes later. In this case, the vow is
an example of a dangling cause.
In general, a dangling cause is an expression of intent, a warning, a
threat, an expression of hope or fear, or a prediction, which places a
question in the audience’s mind for which no immediate answer is pro¬
vided. It thrusts audience attention into the future by arousing curios¬
ity. Early in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975; see Chapter 9),
McMurphy makes a bet with the other patients about Nurse Hatched,
namely that he can 'put a bug so far up her ass she won’t know whether
to shit or wind a wrist watch.” This type of dangling cause is known as
a dialogue hook, for it provides a transition into the following scene,
which finds McMurphy slouching in a chair across from Nurse Hatched,
presumably ready to make good on his bet The question arises—can
he do what he’s said he’ll do?
A dangling cause more commonly is not picked up immediately after
it is established. In Lawrence of Arabia (1962; see Chapter 7), before em¬
barking on an expedition into the desert, Lawrence declares, “It’s going
to be fun,” while his friend Dryden warns him the desert is a “hot, fiery
furnace,” suitable only for gods and Bedouin—and Lawrence is neither.
During the course of the epic, this dangling cause is revisited several
times, as Lawrence proves at various junctures to be both god and
Bedouin—and ultimately dwells on the question: “Who are you?”
Dramatic Irony. Also known as omniscient narration, this is a tool often
overlooked by aspiring screenwriters, who tend to believe that the char¬
acters in a screenplay need to know everything at the same time that the
audience does. Dramatic irony occurs when the audience knows more
than one or several of the characters onscreen, a condition which pushes
audience attention into the future because it creates anticipation about
what is going to happen when the truth comes out, That anticipation is
known as ironic tension, and it is bracketed by a scene of revelation (the
moment the audience is given information of which a character is un
aware) and recognition (the moment the character discovers what the
audience has already known, which serves to resolve the ironic tension).
Dramatic irony comes in two flavors—suspense, which can be used to
inspire fear in the audience, and comic, in which a misunderstanding is
“milked” to produce laughter.
When the audience learns that two co-workers who dislike each
other are unaware that they are writing love Letters to each other in The
Shop Around the Corner {1940; remade as You're Got Mail [1998]—see
Chapter 3) the question naturally arises—what will the outcome be
when the two realize the truth? Dramatic irony has the additional ad¬
vantage of enriching the scene by giving double meaning to the most
mundane lines of dialogue, fn There's Something Aboid Mary (1998),
Ted thinks he’s been arrested for picking up ahitchhikeT while the audi¬
ence knows he’s being questioned by police about a murder, otherwise
innocuous lines he delivers such as “Tve done it several times before,
and “It’s no big deal,” generate laughter.
Skillful storytellers employ hierarchies of knowledge in the use of
dramatic irony, between not onlyThe audience and the characters but
between the characters themselves. In North by Northwest (L959; see
Chapter 6), Hoger Thornhill meets Eve Kendall on the train and she
proves to be almost angelic in the way she helps him evade the police.
Later the audience learns that she’s actually working for the people try¬
ing to kill him (first scene of revelation). During the follomng scenes
between Eve and Roger, iionic tension conies into play as we fear the
danger he does not see. This ironic tension is so powerful it allowed
director Alfred Hitchcock to draw out the subsequent crop-duster scene
10
SCBEE^mRITI^G
An Introduction to Sequences
11
for more than five minutes with no onscreen activity other than a man
waiting for someone near a cornfield. In the scene afterward at the Am¬
bassador East hotel, Roger realizes Eve is working against him, a scene
of recognition that resolves the previous ironic tension. But since Roger
does not tell her that he knows, a new hierarchy of knowledge is cre¬
ated—now he is aware of something she does not know. This layer of
ironic teiision is resolved in the following scene, when Roger confronts
Eve and Vandamm at the auction house, the final scene of recognition
in the relationship between the two.
Dramatic irony is a more powerful tool than telegraphing or dan¬
gling causes, and can sometimes sustain a feature-length film all by it¬
self, though almost usually in the comic rather than the suspense
variety. The Graduate (1967—see Chapter 8), Top Hat (1935), Harvey
(1950), and Being There (1979), in addition to The Shop Around the Cor¬
ner/You ve Got Mail are comedies that use dramatic irony in large mea¬
sure to sustain audience engagement.
Dramatic Tension. This tool is the most powerful of the Big Four, in
that it can be, and has been, the most common one used to sustain au¬
dience emotional involvement in full-length dramatic works for thou¬
sands of years, and its use is the primary subject of most books on
screenwriting and playwriting. Frank Daniel described it simply yet ele¬
gantly: ''Somebody wants something badly and is having difficulty get-
ting it.”= In fact, Daniel articulated two kinds of dramatic stories: chases
and escapes, but these are two versions of the same thing: either some¬
one wants something and is having trouble getting it, or is trying to
escape something and having trouble doing so.
The notion of dividing screenplays into large segments called ''acts''
has been discussed previously, and becomes germane when undertaking
a study of dramatic tension. This book will explore the notion of eight
sequences, but these sequences work within the context of larger seg¬
ments of a full-length film, and for my purposes three acts are most
suitable for articulating and executing dramatic tension. This is because
when a character wants something, a question is imphed: will the char¬
acter get it or not? This is known as the draniatic question^ and a ques¬
tion of necessity has three parts: the posing of the question, the
deliberation on it, and the answer to it. A question need not have any
5. David Howard and Edward Mabley, The Tools of Screenwriting (New York,
NY: St. Martin’s Press, 1996), p. xii.
more parts to it, and is not complete with any less. So, the first act poses
the question: will so-and-so get what he or she wants? The second act
sees the playing out of the question, its "deliberation,” as the character
works against difficulties to gel it, and the third act provides the answer.
Dramatic tension thus thrusts audience attention into the future with
the expectation of the answer to the question.
Understanding dramatic tension in three parts is useful also because
it is echoed in the smaller subdivisions of a dramatic work—successfully
realized sequences and scenes liJcewise have dramatic tension, and thus
each has a “three act structure'': character wanting something, an obsta¬
cle, tension resulting from the conflict between the two, and a resolu¬
tion, leading to a new tension. At the end of the first act in Double
Indemnity (1944; see Chapter 4), Neff decides to help Phyllis kill her
husband for the money and so he can be with her. This poses the dra¬
matic question: will he succeed? The sequence immediately following
raises a different dramatic question: can they set up the murder without
being discovered? There are a series of obstacles to this end. Within each
scene during the setup, there are smaller obstacles, and thus smaller
units of dramatic tension: can they get Mr, Dietrichson to sign the con¬
tract? Can Walter get off the phone before he arouses Keyes’s suspicion?
Any time there is dramatic tension, there are three parts: it must be set
up {question posed); it must be played out (question deliberated), and
it must be resolved (question answered). In film, the “three act struc¬
ture” is something like a fractaliu geometry: a nested structure, iterated
at three different levels.
Understanding dramatic tension in three basic parts has one last
major advantage: it conies to grips with Aristotle’s notion of a
"whole”—what it is that makes a film feel like one film and not, say,
eighty separate scenes, or 120 individual minutes of filmic experience.
When working with dramatic tension as the primary tool in engaging
audience attention^ the answer is the dramatic question and the tension
it creates, knovni as the main tension^ to distinguish it from the various
smaller tensions arising in scenes and sequences. The main tension is
what makes a movie fed like one movie; it's what unifies it; it's what
elevates a film above the sum of its parts (providing “oigaiiic unit)'” in
Aristotelean terms); it’s what we lise when we describe what it is about.
"A man falsely accused of murder and hunted by the police and enemy
agents must try to dear his name” describes what North by No?thwest is
about, and it is nothing more than a recitation of the main tension, with
the implied question: ivUl he succeed? Likewise with Saving Private Ryan
12
SCREENWRITING
(1998)—'‘A man is ordered to lead a squad of soldiers behind enemy
lines to find an American soldier and bring him back alive/' or with
Nights of Cabiria (1957)—lower-class hooker wants love and re¬
spectability."
As will be seen in the analyses that follow, the overwhelming pattern
in successful feature films is that the first act occupies the first 25% of a
film, the second act occupies the middle and runs 50% of the film, and
the third act runs the last 25%. It is also worth noting that the main
tension is not resolved at the end of the picture; in most cases, it is re¬
solved at the end of the second act; in fact, the resolution of the main
tension is what characterizes the end of the second act, and in the third
act, a new dramatic tension almost invariably asserts itself. To use the
above three examples, in North by Northwest, the tension surrounding
Roger trying to clear his name is resolved 77% of the way into the
movie; the third act revolves around the question of saving Eve. In Sav¬
ing Private Ryan, Captain Miller decides to abandon his mission 70% of
the way into the movie; the third-act tension involves defending the
bridge from the Germans; in Nights of Cabiria, Cabiria gets her love and
respectability when the man of her dreams proposes to her 82% of the
way into the movie; the third-act tension revolves around her impend¬
ing marriage and its consequences.
Like dangling causes, dramatic tension plays on an audience’s curios¬
ity, but unlike dangling causes, it requires an emotional connection be¬
tween the audience and a character—the protagonist—in order to
achieve its effect. It is the function of the first act, or in Thompson’s
terms the '‘setup," or David BordwelEs the '‘introduction of setting and
characters" and “explanation of a state of affairs/’ to introduce the pro¬
tagonist—the main character—and create an emotional bond between
him or her and the audience. Once this bond is established, the audi¬
ence will have an emotional stake that goes far beyond mere curiosity
and can sustain audience involvement for the length of the feature film.
These, then, are the four basic tools of the stoiyteller. Other tools
exist that can help enrich the experience of a script or movie, and I will
discuss these during the analyses. These four are presented here because
they are the ones crucial in achieving the most basic task of the screen¬
writer—keeping the audience wondering what is going to happen
next—and thus play the most basic role in how a screenplay “works/’
How Sequences Work
Sequences help solve one of the basic problems in all dramatic writing;
the fact that a drama is a contrivance, but that it will not work if it seems
An Introduction to Sequences
13
like a contrivance. The action in drama unfolds before the audience’s
eyes, and the extent to which it seems spontaneous—the extent to which
it seems that anything might happen—is the extent to which it will per¬
suade an audience that whatever outcome that eventually transpires is
inevitable and therefore satisfying- In this vein, coincidences that hurt a
protagonist tend to work in drama, and are viewed suspiciously if they
help-
Sequences, by posing a series of dramatic questions within the overall
dramatic tension, offer an opportunity to give the audience a glimpse
of a great many possible outcomes to the picture before the actual reso¬
lution. Screenwriters are sometimes counseled to keep in mind that the
characters do not know what the movie is about—in order to create
compelling drama, it must seem as though the movie is what happens
despite what the characters want or expect. Conceiving a story in se¬
quences is a means of achieving this. For example, a writer may invent
a story in which, in the setup, a married man becomes obsessed with a
woman and decides heb willing to risk everything to have her. Instead
of the writer posing the question “how do I make the pursuit of this
woman fill up sixty or ninety minutes of screen time?" it is much more
fruitful for him or her to ask “what is the quickest and easiest way for
this character to get the girl?" Human nature being what it is, chances
are the man will do the easiest thing first, and only if that fails will he
try a more difficult course of action. The “easiest thing" may only take
fifteen minutes of screen time. In developing a story, a writer needs to
have the courage to let the second act end after only fifteen pages, if the
protagonist is able to achieve his objective in that amount of screen
time. It is then easy enough to brainstorm and come up with develop¬
ments that foil this outcome.
After the first thirty-five minutes of Being John Malkomcli (1999; see
Chapter 11), Craig has figured out how to get Maxine, the woman of
his dreams: he’s planning to work nights alone with her in the “Malko-
vich portal" business, and a positiTfe,outcome to his quest for her seems
readdy at hand Yet fifteen niinutes of screen time later his wife has de¬
cided she’s a transsexual and is in Love with Maxine, The next three se¬
quences detail his rejection by Maxine in favor of his wife, his successful
abduction of his wife (which then becomes threatened by Malkovich
himself), and finally his success in “getting" Maxine by figuring out
how to control Malkovich. The means by which he finally achieves her
love is hardly something he could have conceived of after first going
into business with her, but carefully worked out drcunistances have, in
the end, forced him to push himself to the limit.
14
16
SCREENWRITING
Over the course of a typical two-hour movie, the eight-sequence
structure works out as follows. This is, of course, a paradigm—an ideal
layout—and variations have been done, very effectively. But it will serve
as a starting point.
Sequence A
The first fifteen minutes of a picture answer the questions of who, what,
when, where, and under what conditions the picture will take place—
the exposition. Before such exposition, though, it is crucial to ‘‘hook”
the audience and get them interested in watching further. The most
common technique for achieving this in the first sequence is through
the use of curiosity. Most successful movies begin by posing a puzzle to
the audience, raising questions in their minds, and promising an an¬
swer. Chinatown (1974) opens with a puzzling series of photographs
showing a couple having sex, accompanied by offscreen groaning. Sun¬
set Boulevard (1950) starts with the frantic arrival of police cars, whose
officers quickly converge on a man lying face down in a swimming pool.
Once curiosity is used to draw an audience in to the picture, there
will be a chance to supply exposition—backgi'Ound material—answering
the crucial questions so that the story proper can begin.
Almost always, but not invariably, the audience is introduced to the
main character, or protagonist^ in the first sequence, and is given a
glimpse of the flow of life of the protagonist before the story itself be¬
gins— in medias res. An effective first sequence can give us a sense of
what the protagonist's life would have been like if the events that lead
to stoiy hadn't interfered. In fact, the stronger the sense of flow of life
at the beginning of the picture, the bigger the impact of the destabilizing
events that intrude to make the story happen. North by Northwest is
exemplary of this in the extent to which the storytellers cram a full eve¬
ning and day's worth of appointments for the protagonist, Roger
Thornhill, in the opening four minutes; having thus given us a glimpse
of the flow of his life, none of these appointments is ever actually real¬
ized.
Usually by the end of the first sequence, there arises a moment in the
picture called the point of attack, or inciting incident. This is the first
intrusion of instability on the initial flow of life, forcing the protagonist
to respond in some way. For Roger Thornhill, it is his abduction; for
Jake Gittes in Chinatown^ it is his realization that he's been duped.
An Introduction to Sequences
Sequence B
The second fifteen minutes of a film, ending approximately 25% of the
way into a typical twO'hour picture, tend almost invariably to focus on
setting up the main tension, of posing the dramatic question that will
shape the rest of the picture. As such, the end of the second sequence
tends to mark the end of the first act.
Most commonly, the protagonist introduced in the first sequence
spends the second sequence attempting to grapple with the destabilizing
element introduced into his or her life during the first fifteen minutes
of the picture. The character may have every expectation that the prob¬
lem will be solved and the storf finished, but life itself has other plans.
Whatever solutions the protagonist attempts during the second se¬
quence lead only to a bigger problem, ox predicament, marking the end
of the first act and setting up the main tension, which occupies the sec¬
ond. In the Chinatown example, Gittes tries to get to the bottom of who
hired him and why, and winds up being hired by the real Mrs, Mulwray
after her husband turns up dead.
Sequence C
The third fifteen-minute sequence of a picture allows the protagonist a
first attempt at solving the problem posed at the end of the first act. As
mentioned previously, people being what they are, characters tend to
choose the easiest solution to the problem, hoping it will be resolved
immediately, The character may indeed solve an immediate problem in
the third sequence (as in any of the sequences), but the resolution of
one problem can lead to much bigger and deeper problems. In Midnight
Run (1988), Jack Walsh, unable to bring his prisoner from New York Co
California by plane, opts for a train ride. This is soon thwarted by a
rival, and he winds up instead taking a bus, which in turn is attacked
by the mob and the FBI, forcing-him to borrow a car. The choices of
transportation are progressively less desirable, reflecting Jacks increas¬
ing difficulty.
Sequence D '
The fourth fifteen-minute sequence finds the first attempt at resolution
failing, and sees the protagonist tij one or more desperate measures to
return his or her life to stability.
16
SCREENWRIT^G
An Introduction to Sequences
17
The end of the fourth sequence very often leads to the First Culmina¬
tion or Midpoint Culmination of a film. This may be a revelation or
some reversal of fortune that makes the protagonist’s task more diffi¬
cult. Successfully realized scripts at this juncture often give the audience
a very clear glimpse of an answer to the dramatic question—the hope
that the protagonist will actually succeed at resolving his or her prob¬
lem—only to see circumstances turn the story the other way. Tn this
sense, the first culmination may be a glimpse at the actual resolution of
the picture, or its mirror opposite.
Midway through Tootsie (1982), Michael Dorsey reaches a pinnacle
of career success, but he is living a lie and doesn’t have a romantic rela¬
tionship with Julie; in the resolution at the end of the picture, his situa¬
tion is the mirror opposite: he has lost his career but is no longer living
a lie, and has a tentative romantic relationship with Julie.
Sequence E
During the next fifteen or so minutes, the protagonist works on what¬
ever new complication arose in at the first culmination. Again, success¬
fully realized scripts can give a glimpse of apparent success or failure,
though usually not as profound as at the first culmination. Sometimes
this is a place in the story in which new characters are introduced and
new opportunities present themselves. This, and Sequence F, are some¬
times occupied primarily by subplots, if there are any.
In some pictures, the experience of the first culmination may be so
profound as to provide a complete reversal of the protagonist’s objec¬
tive. During the first half of the second act of Sunset Boulevard, Gillis
works on Norma’s script with the aim of escaping her despite her efforts
to keep him; after she attempts suicide at the midpoint, he spends the
second half of the second act trying to stay with Norma despite Betty’s
efforts to pull him away.
As with the other sequences, the resolution of the tension in this se¬
quence does not resolve the main tension (i.e., solve the protagonist’s
problem), it merely creates new complications, usually more difficult
with stakes that are higher still.
Seqtfence F
During this, the last sequence of the second act, the character, having
eliminated all the easy potential solutions and finding the going most
difficult, works at last toward a resolution of the main tension, and the
dramatic question is answered. The end of the sixth sequence thus
marks the end of the second act, also known as the Second Culmination.
As such, It gives the audience yet another glimpse of a possible outcome
of the picture.
The Second Culmination, like the first, can be a glimpse of the actual
resolution of the picture, or, more typically, its mirror opposite. In Sun¬
set Boulevard, Gillis and Betty kiss, marking the high point of their rela¬
tionship, which is the mirror opposite of the resolution, when he loses
everything and winds up face do^vn in the swimming pooh In Midnight
Run, Jack is under arrest and has lost John Mardukas to his rival, the
mirror opposite of the resolution, when he makes it to I„A. in time and
winds up a free man with 3300,000.
It is a common misconception that the end of the second act needs
to be a 'how point” in the story. In studying many films, I have not
found this to be the case; only three films in this volume —Toy Story,
Lawrence of Arabia, and The Graduate—could be said to follow this pat¬
tern. In developing a story, I have found it to be far more useful for the
writer to conceive of this moment in the story in relationship to the
main tension in some profound way—either by completely resolving it
or by reframing it significantly. Seeing it as a 'how point” cuts off a
writer from a great many story possibilities.
Sequence G
As with the resolutions of tension in sequences A through E, the appar¬
ent or actual resolution of the main tension in the sequence F is not the
final word. Unexpected consequences of that resolution can come forth,
and other story lines and dangling causes previously established bring
forth new^ and even more difficult problems, sometimes forcing the
character to work against his or her previous objectives. In effect, the
story is sometimes turned upside doym and we glimpse it from a very
new angle. The seventh sequence is often characterized by still higher
stakes and a more frenzied pace, and its resolution is often characterized
by a major twist. In Bullets Oyer Broadway (1994), David’s play is a suc¬
cess—solving the main tension—and he turns to deal with one of the
unexpected consequences—Cheech’s obsession with Olive, which re¬
sults in her murder. In The Apartment (1960), Baxter, having achieved
success in the corporate world, abandons that ambition and decides to
pursue Kubelik, only to have this thwarted by his boss.
18
SCREENWRITING
An Introduction to Sequences
19
Seqruence H
The eighth and final sequence almost invariably contains the resolution
of a picture—the point at last where, for better or for worse, the insta¬
bility created in the point of attack is settled. Having been given a
glimpse of the resolution at the First and Second Culminations and to
a lesser extent at the end of each sequence, tension is at last fully and
completely resolved. Depending on the picture, the guy winds up with
the girl (Tootsie) or is doomed never to get her (Chinatown).
Sequence H also almost invariably contains an epilogue or coda, a
brief scene or series of scenes tying up any loose ends, closing off any
remaining dangling causes or subplots, and generally giving the audi¬
ence a chance to catch its breath and come dotvn emotionally fro nr the
intensity of their experience.
A note on the analyses
It's easy to tell when a film begins and ends; it's harder to judge when,
exactly, an act begins and ends, particularly the end of the second act.
A further subdivision into more than three parts can naturally lead to
some disagreement as to where, exactly, one subdivision ends and an¬
other begins, even with a precise notion of what defines these subdivi¬
sions. In some movies, the sequence structure as defined in this volume
is readily apparent; these include films that involve journeys {Lawrence
of Arabia and Fellowship of the Ring among those analyzed herein) and
those with few if any subplots. Films with subplots (in this volume The
Shop Around the Corner and Being John Malkovich) tend to be more
open to interpretation, but the patterns remain. T invite the reader to
do their own analyses and compare notes.
A further challenge to this t)^e of analysis is in the variance between
classical scripts that were written explicitly by sequence (in this volume,
these include The Shop Around the Corner and Double Indemnity) and
my own analysis. Based on my examination of screenplays written from
the 1930s through 1950s, it seems that sequences by this time had a
variety of definitions, sometimes corresponding to length, sometimes
subject matter, and sometimes location. A comparison between how the
sequences were divided in the written screenplays of these two films,
and my own analysis, is provided in the appropriate chapters. Further,
it is important to bear in mind that, with the exception of The Shop
Ajvund the Corner, Double Indemnity, and Air Force One, the films ana¬
lyzed in this volume were not written consciously in sequences. My
analyses seek to uncover the sequence structure that exists in these hlms
nonetheless.
In my experience as a writer and teacher, shared with colleagues at
Chapman University and the University of Southern California, the se¬
quence approach can be veiy valuable as a tool for students to develop
their screenplays. The charts included in this volume contain exact tim¬
ings and percentages, which can lend a sense that the technique is more
precise than it is. The indusion of the minute/second timings and per¬
centages is intended as a basis for comparison of patterns across a range
of films, and is not intended to give the impression that a writer needs
to adhere so precisely to these patterns in the development of his or her
screenplays.
With the exception of Toy Stor)^^ the films are presented in this vol¬
ume in chronological order. The films were chosen because they repre¬
sent a variety of storytelling style.s, patterns, and subject matter.
Toy Story: Firing on Ali Eight
Arriving in theaters in late 1995, Toy Story was acclaimed as a break¬
through for its use of computer-generated animation, and proved to be
a major commercial success. But its success was not due solely to the
technology behind it. The simple fact is that the script for Toy Story is
one of the better ones written during the last century. In fact, if the
script hadn’t been so good, most likely the computer-generated graphics
would not have been noticed.
The film is a good starting point for screenplay analysis for several
reasons: one, being an animated piece, there are fewer layers between
the conception on the page and the execution on the screen. The art
director didn't arrive at the scripted location only to discover that it
wasn’t right for the scene; the problems of weather didn’t intrude, and
as parodied during the end titles in Toy Story 2, there were no actors
throwing tantrums and insisting on making changes in the script. What
was written was what wound up on screen, and the him greatly bene¬
fited from the fact.
The film is also a good starting point because it so profoundly real¬
izes the three-act, eight-sequence paradigm, even though, like most
screenplays written since the 1950s, the sequences are not marked in
the script. It also very explicitly utilizes the Big Four tools to achieve its
considerable impact, and is strong in the areas of character and theme.
Sequence A: The Unwanted Present
The opening sequence, which runs thirteen and a half minutes, begins
with a pre-title sequence that is not part of Sequence A proper, but
rather serves more as a prologue that establishes the mundane aspects
of the reality of the world in which the story will take place.
Almost all movies open with either an exterior long shot or, more
rarely, an interior close-up. The reason for this is the need of the audi-_
ence to become oriented—an exterior immediately helps give a sense ot
where the story will take place. An interior close-up answers the same
need— the focus begins on one specific object, then works outward until
we are oriented. In contrast, use of an interior medium .shot as an open¬
ing is comparatively rare, and can even Lend a sense that the projection¬
ist started with the wrong reel.
Toy Story opens with an interior—^but it appears to be an exterior a
blue sky rvith puffy white clouds, which is soon revealed to be the wall¬
paper in Andy’s room, The use of curiosity now comes into play—we
arrive in the middle or end of an imaginary game, utilizing the various
toys Dramatic tension is present within the game—Mr. Potato Head b
holding some other toys hostage—but it’s not engaging on the dramatic
level because we do not know any of the characters involved. The open¬
ing w engaging because it poses a puzzle-where, exactly, are we? Who
is playing this game? Why? Many unsuccessful scripts begin by tiying to
start the story immediately, with expository dialogue and conflict, y
discussed m Chapter L, most successful ones, in contrast, hook the audi¬
ence initially by tapping into its natural curiosity, then starling the story
once curiosity is aroused,
Soon after the puzzle of the opening play-scene, the titles begin along
with theme music, and Woody’s role as Andy’s favorite toy is sho^,
not only in the game Andy plays but also in the subsequent jaunt they
take through the house. This activity solves the puzzle of who was play¬
ing the game, and where was it taking place, posed by tie opening shots.
When Andy brings Woody downstairs, the first use of telegraphing
is seen: a banner reading “Happy Birthday Andy, and dialogue
an impending move, create a deadline, Thus six minutes into the film,
and four pages into the shooting script, the audience s attention is
shifted from solving a puzzle to ariticipation of the future.
The end of the titles—with Woody lying on Andy’s bed-marks the
beginning of the mosde proper. Having been given a glimpse of a
dane, ordinary world, the magif begins, when Woody stirs on the bed
and immediately voices concern about the birthday party. Here, again,
curiosity comes into play rather than dramatic tension—we quicWy
learn the birthday paity means trouble, though we’re not told why.
Once the puzzle is posed—why is a birthday a problem^-we get the
first real exposition of the movie, during Woody’s speech before the
22
23
SCREENWRfTING
"staff meeting,” revealing that eveiy year, Christmas and birtlidays are
a traumatic experience for toys, who fear they will be replaced by some
new plaything- Woody’s speech also contains telegraphing—he reminds
the toys they have one week till the move—and marks the first use of a
dangling cause—his assurances that no one will be replaced is an emo¬
tion-laden prediction about the future.
The continuing turmoil among the toys, despite Woody s attempts
to assuage their fears, leads directly to what can be regarded as the end
of the first act” of the sequence—Woody agreeing to call out the troops
if that will calm everyone down. By this time it has become clear Woody
IS the protagonist of the sequence (he is the one with whom we spend
the most time; he is the also the one who recognizes a problem and
takes the action of calling a meeting)'—and his desire is made clear-—he
wants to calm down the toys. This thread of dramatic tension, begin¬
ning five minutes after the titles, flows through the rest of the sequence
and carries with it the implicit dramatic question: will Woody succeed
in calming them down?
Exposition
At the dawn of drama in Ancient Greece, exposition—the informa¬
tion the audience needs to know about the characters and circum¬
stances in order to become emotionally involved in the play—was
handled by a character named ^‘Prologue" who would appear on¬
stage and simply deliver this information. Since then, writers have
become more adept at smuggling such Information in without the
audience knowing about it. The two chief means by which screen¬
writers handie this nowadays are through a scene of conflict_‘ex¬
position as ammunition”—and by posing a puzzle to the audience
and then having a character solve the puzzle with information. The
storytellers here in Toy Story employ both: when Woody tells Slink
that there’s trouble without saying why, it poses a puzzle; when he
explains it, it's couched in an argument—he reassures the toys that
no one will be replaced, in the process delivering information that
this happens every birthday and Christmas.
As long as the dialogue delivering the exposition has a subtext,
i.e., an underlying action (for example, attack, defend, persuade, se¬
duce, reassure) the audience won’t notice that it’s getting exposi¬
tion. The oniy subtext to avoid is explain—\Vs too neutral and will
probably yield a dull scene. And worst of all, the audience probably
w/7/notice.
Toy Story: Firing on All Eight
This dramatic question is unrelated to the main tension of the film,
and does not carry with it high stakes or extremes of action or emotion,
but it does provide a crucial thread that binds the first thirteen minutes
of the film together. It is the wellspring of conflict during the staff-meet¬
ing scene, it justifies the action of calling out the troops, and it provides
conflict in the scene after Woody is knocked off the bed. Further, the
arguments Woody uses to calm the toys—the assurance that no one will
be replaced, and that what is Important is what Andy wants, not what
the toys want—become central to the main tension of the film and
Wood/s predicament therein, and likewise provide the framework in
which the theme of the picture—love, and attempts to will it—is ex¬
plored.
When the troops are called out, the dramatic tension shifts slightly,
centering on the objective of the troops—to spy on the party down
below—and the obstacle—the troops must not be discovered. This ob¬
stacle, dramatized well when the soldiers are caught in the open at the
entrance to the kitchen and have to freeze—provides crucial exposition
into the way the world works—namely, toys hax^e a secret life unlaaown
to adults and only pretend to be inanimate objects, This rule imbues
the entire him with a layer of ironic tension—the audience is let in on
the secret—and plays a crucial role in the third act of the film when it
is broken.
The troops' mission is an apparent success until Mom pulls out a
surprise present^ which leads to consternation among the toys listening
upstairs in the bedroom, where a new obstacle arises from an old one—
because of the toys' anxiety, Rex, the most neurotic, knocks the two-
way radio off the nightstand, interrupting the flow of information from
the troops. This leads to a brief interlude of ironic tension—the audi¬
ence is shown that Andy and his friends are heading upstairs, but the
toys, whom we know by now must pretend to be inanimate when hu¬
mans are around—are unaware of this.
This ironic tension is resolved when the toys tune in again just in
time to find out the boys are on their way upstairs, inspiring a frenzied
attempt by everyone to take his place. Andy and his.friends enter the
room and deposit the mysterious new toy on the bed, then exit quicidy,
bringing the sequence to arj end.
The tension in the sequence—wili Woody be able to calm down the
toys?—is resolved to the positive when the last toy is announced to be
a Battleship game—an evidently innocuous present. The toys are in a
relaxed, celebratory mood, and Woody is their triumphant leader.
24
25
SCREEt^WRITING
When Mom springs the surprise present, this mood is reversed and
leads abruptly to the end of the sequence. The dramatic question is fi¬
nally rendered moot when the party is over and a mysteiy toy takes
Woody's place on top of the bed.
The first sequence of Toy Story Is a tour-de-force of screenwriting,
and not just because of its more obvious merits—its clever dialogue and
interesting, engaging characters. The reject pile in Hollywood is replete
with broken scripts heavy on clever dialogue and interesting characters.
Wliat makes Toy Story special is the way it so masterfully uses the Big
Four tools of screenwriting to engage the audience from its opening
moments. Crucial exposition—the nature and rules of the world in
which the story will take place, the principal characters and their rela¬
tionships and routines—is skillfully smuggled into the film while the
audience is enthralled by the concerns, aspirations, and reversals of the
characters onscreen.
The opening sequence also demonstrates effective use of preparation,
in one of its variants, retardation (see text box),
An example of preparation by contrast in the opening sequence is
the celebration that occurs among the toys when the last of the presents
Preparation
An important tool that can greatly enrich an audience’s experience
of a film, a scene of preparation is one which is explicitly designed
to create an expectation in the sudietice-—usually hope or fear_
which Es then paid off either directly (we are led to expect something
terrible wifi happen, and it does) or by contrast (we are led to expect
something terrible will happen, but something wonderful does, or
vice versa the classic “reversal”). These are scenes that can usu¬
ally be cut out of a film entirely without affecting the plot, but they
greatly enhance the emotionaf impact of a film. Retardation, an ex¬
ample of which is the “dramatic pause” in an actor’s speech, is a
form of preparation in which some promised event—the arrival of
a character, for example, or the revelation of some information—is
presented to the audience, which is then made to wait for it, the
effect being the buildup of anticipation. Captain Spaulding's en¬
trance in the Marx Brothers film Animai Crackers is a good example
of retardation—Captain Spaulding’s imminent arrival is the subject
of excited discussion and two eiaborate songs before he shows up.
In this case, the preparation is paid off in reverse—as soon as he
arrives, he announces he's leaving.
Joy Story: Firing on All Eight
has been opened, and the present-opening ritual has apparently ended
with none of the toys threatened with replacement. As soon as our
hopes are raised in this way, Andy's Mom brings on the surprise pres¬
ent, and feai takes the place of hope.
The effective use of retardation is demonstrated immediately after¬
ward. More than two minutes elapse between the revelation that Mom
has a surprise gift and our first glimpse of Buzz on top of the bed. Dur¬
ing this interval there transpires much frantic activity, consternation,
and trepidation among Andy's toys^ and clever shot selection that
thwarts the audience’s ability to determine just what this new toy is.
This footage could easily be cut out—the audience and toys could be
told immediately the fact that the last toy is a Buzz Lightyear, and the
plot would have remained intact. In fact, Buzz could have been the first
toy opened, saving several more minutes of screen time without affect¬
ing the plot at all. But by teasing the audience thus, the effect of Buzz’s
arrival is greatly magnified.
As mentioned previously, one of the most common misconceptions
of novice screenwriters is the belief that the audience aaid characters
must know everything all the time as soon as it is knowable; in fact, a
skillful screenwriter knows what information to withhold, when to
withhold it, and when to reveal it for maximum impact. Such knowl¬
edge comes only with practice, experiment, and experience, and when
developing a screenplay, it is worth experimenting with the story in this
regard.
The first sequence also features clever use of motifs (see text box,
page 45). These are props or lines of dialogue or evcTipatterns of behav¬
ior that are introduced {planted )—usually surreptitiously—by the
writer, which are brought up later in a different context {paid off). In
the opening sequence, motifs that are planted include Woody's habit of
playing checkers mth Stink, Sketch's skill at drawing. Potato Head’s de¬
sire for a Mrs, Potato Head, and Rex's desire Co develop a frightening
roar. All are paid off in various ways in the sequences that follow, and
the ease with which they are embroidered into the script is a testimony
to the extent to which it was worked and lervorked by knowledgeable
craftsmen.
1
Sequence B: Falling With Style
The second sequence is a short one, running six minutes length, and
is also unified by dramatic tension—Woody’s assertion of his superior
position over Buzz, an issue that did not exist before.
26
SCREENWRITING
After the boys’ hurried departure, the toys emerge from hiding, look¬
ing up at the bed in awe. Woody peeks out from beneath the bed, and
the toys suggest that Woody has himself been replaced (something
which literally occurred when he was knocked off his place on the bed).
Woody makes his way up to the bed and introduces himself to Buzz.
The arrival of Buzz constitutes the point of attack of the picture. The
stable world of the opening sequence has had a new, potentially destabi¬
lizing element introduced to it. It is not yet clear what the movie as a
whole is about, but Buzz’s arrival is clearly something with which the
characters must contend before “normality,” or stability, can be re¬
gained.
Two and a half minutes into the second sequence, Woody tells Buzz
that there has been a mistake—the spot on the bed just occupied by
Buzz is his own spot, a moment which constitutes the end of the “first
act” of the sequence—Woody is again the protagonist of the sequence,
and his objective is to disarm the threat Buzz apparently poses to his
place at the top of the heap of toys. During the rest of the sequence, he
attempts to accomplish this by simple argument, then, when the other
toys become increasingly impressed by Buzz's considerable technologi¬
cal attributes, by verbal harangues against the new arrival, culminating
in Woody’s derisive claim that Buzz canT fly—followed by Buzz’s suc¬
cessful “flight” around the room.
Buzz’s flight (which plants a significant motif), and Bo Peep’s subse¬
quent statement, “Tve found my moving buddy,” bring about the reso¬
lution of the tension of the second sequence—to the negative. Woody’s
attempts to defend his position as the most esteemed toy have failed.
The sequence ends with Woody making a declaration that is a classic
example of a dangling cause known as a dialogue hook: “You’ll see. In
a few days, everything will be the same. I’m still Andy’s favorite toy.”
This declaration marks the end of the first act of the picture, and not
insignificantly is delivered in a close-up of the protagonist, something
not uncommon at the end of the first act.
All the necessary pieces of the dramatic predicament are present: we
know whose story it is (Woody); we know what he wants {to regain his
place as And/s favorite toy), and we know what the obstacle will be
(Buzz). The dramatic question has been posed: “Will Woody regain his
spot as Andy’s favorite toy?” and the main tension of the him is thus
initiated. The audience’s hopes and fears will be tied up to Woody’s
hopes and fears about obtaining his objective.
When discussing the three-act structure in films, it is worth noting
that no curtains mark the ends of the acts, as can be the case in theater.
Jov Story: Firing on All Eight _^
However, some films do have curtains, and Toy Story is one of them: the
musical montage, which follows (and in fact refutes) Woody s declara¬
tion that he is still Andy’s favorite toy. This musical montage pays off
several motifs planted in the opening sequence: Sketch’s drawing ability,
Rex’s desire to make a more persuasive roar, Woody’s checkers games
with Slink. All of these payoffs attack Woody’s standing among the toys,
either directly or indirectly.
Sequence C: Buzz Takes A Hit
Like Sequence B, the third sequence h fairly short, running just under
nine minutes, including the musical montage, which serves as part of
the “first act” of the sequence—giving the audience information needed
to setup the dramatic tension of the sequence, the information in this
case being the fact that Woody has in fact been displaced by Buzz in
Andy’s esteem, and in that of the fellow toys.
The montage ends with the planting of an important motif—Buzz
showing Woody the faa that Andy has written his name on the bottom
of Buzz’s foot (“in permanent Inkl”), a visual confirmation that Andy
has accepted Buzz. This, and Woody’s sensitivity to it, triggers Woody’s
first attempt to regain his position at the top: a verbal confrontation
with Buzz. This attempt marks the end of the ‘"first act” of the sequence:
Woody is its protagonist, and his desire is to eliminate Buzz as a threat
to his hegemony. The obstacle is readily apparent: Buzz’s popularity
with Andy and the other toys. The dramatic question is posed: can
Woody eliminate Buzz as a threat?
In this case, tlie tension of the sequence and the main tension of the
picture are identical, a situation not uncommon in Sequence C, because
it transpires immediately after the establishment of the main tension.
The protagonist is thus freshly armed with an objective, and he or she
attemp ts to solve it as quickly and easily as possible. Complications that
arise from this first attempt form subsequent tensions in later se¬
quences, which of necessity differ from the main tension.
Woody’s verbal confrontation threatens to escalate into a physical
confrontation, when it is interrppted by the arrival of Sid, the disturbed,
violently antTtoy next-door neighbor. Sid’s execution of a “Combat
Carlf’ witnessed by ad the toys, dramatizes the threat Sid poses to the
toys, and also plants the motif of his use of explosives to achieve his
ends.
28
29
SCRgENWRITlNG
The scene ends with telegraphing: one of the toys expressing grati¬
tude that they 11 be moving soon. After a dissolve to dinnertime, more '■
telegraphing occurs when Andy’s mom offers to take him to Pizza
Planet for dinner, thus explicitly telling the audience where the story
will be going. Because Andy can only take one toy with him, Woody
becomes anxious, hoping he will be chosen, and afraid he won’t—yet ^
another dangling cause. Woody’s first attempt at defeating Buzz,
through direct confrontation, has been a failure, so he makes his second
attempt: deception. His ruse—manipulating Buzz into rescuing a toy
trapped behind the desk—has the unexpected consequence of launch¬
ing Buzz out the window. The resolution of the tension in the third
sequence is thus at hand, and it is, again, a negative from Woody’s point
of view. True enough, he does eliminate Buzz as a competitor for Andy’s
affection, but now he is an outcast in his own society, hated by his fellow
toys as a murderer.
At the end of the sequence, Sketch’s drawing ability is again paid off,
this time with a drarving of a hangman^s noose, directed at Woody. Se¬
quence C thus ends with a dangling cause—in this case a threat.
Sequence D: Double Prizes at Pizza Planet
The fourth sequence, which runs a little over ten minutes in length, be¬
gins with Buzz climbing onto the family car, which then conveys Andy,
his mom, Woody, and Buzz to a big gas station, A short period of ironic
tension occurs, during which the audience knows that Buzz is on the
car, but Woody does not This irony is quickly resolved when Buzz ap¬
pears in the sunroof and hops down to Woody.
Here, a little over a minute into the fourth sequence, the end of the
first act of Sequence D transpires: Woody, upon seeing Buzz, states
his objective: ''Great! Andy will see you, he’ll talce us back to the room,
and you can explain it was all a mistake.” Woody is, again, the protago¬
nist of the sequence. His objective is to get Buzz back home so he can
clear his name. The dramatic question: "Will Woody be able to get Buzz
back home?” Woody’s overall objective remains the same: to regain his
place of love and admiration among toys and Andy. But his specific
purpose within the sequence is much more limited; just get Buzz back
home. The chief obstacle clearly will he Buzz’s anger at Woody for
knocking him out the window in the first place. In making his state¬
ment, Woody is also telegraphing the future course of the story, though
Toy Story: Bring on All Eight
in this case it turns out to be 'Talse” telegraphing: his hopes, thus ex¬
pressed, are thwarted by later circumstances. Still, it serves the purpose
of creating anticipation—pushing the audience’s attention into the fu¬
ture.
At this juncture, the skill of the storytellers is again on display—they
have arranged the story in a way that binds the protagonist and antago¬
nist together; in fact, the protagonist is put into the difficult position of
having to try to get the antagonist—the one person on earth he likes
least—to cooperate with him. This storytelling arrangement is not an
accident, and a script can succeed or fail because of storytelling deci¬
sions like this. For example, in The Shop Around the Corner (see Chapter
3), the protagonist and antagonist are thrown into close and constant
proximity because they work together in the same shop. In the 1998
remake You^’ye GotMaih the storytellers chose to put them in rival com¬
panies in separate locations, and the result was a loss of intensity in the
drama as -svell as the comedy, and a remake that was less successful than
the original
Soon after Woody explains his plan to Buzz, the latter balks at coop¬
erating with Woody, and a fistfight rapidly ensues. This leads to yet an¬
other deeper problem: Andy’s departure, which leaves Woody and Buzz
stranded, Woody’s objective remains the same: get Buzz back home, but
this much more formidable obstacle has arisen. After the arrival of a
fuel truck, which nearly crushes Woody, Buzz and Woody resume then
Recapitulation Scenes
Rims have a relentless forward motion; a \lewer is not expected to
go back and review material he or she may have missed, even as the
widespread use of DVDs and videocassettes makes this possible.
Filmmakers have dealt with this problem from the early days of nar¬
rative cinema by carefully repeating important information. Occa¬
sionally, an entire scene is used priinarily to review important
information and then set up future action; this is known as a recspit-
alation scene. Typically, such a scene has one or more characters
recount briefly where the story has been, often h the context of try¬
ing to figure out vrhatto do next; thus it serves both to review and
create anticipation. These scenes are not uncominort in mysteries
and thrillers, which tend to be plot-heavy ard involve twists and
turns that might leave the audmoce confused.
30
31
SCREENWRITING
confrontation in what is known as a recapitulation scene (see text box
p. 29). When Woody tells Buzz it’s a perfect time to panic, because ^‘I’m
lost, Andy’s gone, they’re going to be moving in two days. . . The
important issues driving the picture are restated clearly and forcefully.
A scene of preparation by contrast follows their confrontation, in
which they go separate ways, and we are led to believe all is lost. At this
juncture. Woody sees the Pizza Planet delivery truck and a reversal oc¬
curs: Woody recognizes a way to persuade Buzz to cooperate, and de¬
spair turns to hope. In Woody’s attempt to persuade Buzz to board the
Pizza Planet truck, we see again an example of telegraphing, in which
Woody explains what the procedure will be (“The truck will take us
back to the refueling station, which can then take us home.”) This dia¬
logue is also an example of indirection (see text box p. 31).
Just prior to their trip on the Pizza Planet truck, Buzz warns Woody
not to ride in the back, as there are no safety restraints. This dangling
cause is quickly picked up during Woody’s brief but painful ride to
Pizza Planet.
Once at their destination, another scene of preparation by contrast
plays out, this time raising our hopes and leading to the First Culmina¬
tion of the picture. Woody and Buzz successfully sneak inside, then
make their way through the establishment to within striking distance of
Andy. The audience is given a clear glimpse of the end of the picture—a
positive resolution in which Woody and Buzz get home safely and
Woody’s name is cleared. Just when hope is at its highest, though—
when Andy’s sister’s stroller approaches the two—Buzz wanders off to
another attraction across the room and we arrive at the negative resolu¬
tion of the sequence.
Buzz winds up with a game machine full of toy aliens; Woody is
compelled to abandon his sure ride home and rescue him; the neighbor
Sid—cleverly introduced in the previous sequence—appears at the
worst possible time and “wins” both Woody and Buzz.
The dramatic question of the sequence has been answered: Woody
failed to get Buzz back home so he can clear his name. And, as in Se¬
quence C, the end of this sequence finds Woody’s attempts to solve his
initial problem—regaining his place at the top of the heap—leading to
even graver difficulties. It’s useful to note in this sequence the extent to
which the storytellers are concerned with keeping the audience ori¬
ented—explicitly telling us where we are in the story, what just hap¬
pened, what it means, what the future plans of the characters are, and
their hopes and fears. Storytellers who fail to consider these issues run
Toy Story: Firing on All Eight
the risk of writing a script that leaves the reader lost, disengaged, and
disenchanted.
The sequence ends with Sid uttering a dialogue hook into the Se¬
quence E: “Let’s go to my house'_and . . . play.^'
Sequence E: Falling Without Style
1
The fifth sequence begins immediately with a dangling cause—Woody
warns Buzz and the alien toy: “You guys don’t get it: Once we go into
Sid’s house, we won't be coming out” It’s an outright prediction of the
future, and contributes, to a scene of preparation—the creation of dread
Indirection
This dramatic technique comes in two flavors: visual and verbal. The
use of verbal indirection is a means by which a writer can avoid writ¬
ing dialogue that is ‘‘on the nose"—characters expressing exactly
what they mean In the most direct possible terms. Aside from being
dulf such dialogue tends also not to be particularly lifelike: people
tend to be more complex in the way they express themselves.
Indirection is another example of a tool that is easier to use in a
rewrite than in a first draft. A useful exercise a writer can perform
when he or she encounters a scene with dialogue that is too direct
is to try the opposite—can a character who is angry express himself
by being ironically playful instead of just plain mad?
Indirection can also be motivated by the needs of the characters
within a scene. Toy Story while stranded at the gas station.
Woody describes a plan to get Buzz back to his home planet by get¬
ting onto the delivery truck, but the audience recognizes that he is
indirectly describing a secret plan to get Buzz home to Andy’s house.
The other type of indirection—visual—involves implying events
rather than showing them. This can mean using sounds of an event
instead of the sight, or showing reactions rather than actions. An
effective example in Toy Story is Sid's destruction of the Combat
Cart in Sequence C. When the firecracker explodes, the image
shown is not of the Combat Carl but rather the toys watching from
the window. We hear the explosion, the camera shakes, debris Ties,
and the toys are knocked about, but we never actually see the de-
struction.
32
33
SCREENWRITING
about Sid’s house—that begins with ominous music and is further de¬
veloped when Sid feeds the alien toy to his ravenous dog.
When they arrive in Sid’s room, Woody and Buzz watch while Sid
does a '‘double bypass brain transplant’’ on his sister Hannah’s rag dolL
The operation is an important motif, paid off in two important ways
subsequently.
When Sid leaves the room moments later, we arrive at the end of the
setup, or “first act” of Sequence E, three minutes into the SiVz-minute
sequence, when Woody tells Buzz: “We are gonna die, Tin out of here.”
Woody is again the protagonist of the sequence, and his objective is to
escape from Sid’s house with Buzz. Again, this will serve Wood/s over¬
all objective—regaining his place at the top—but is it a different ten¬
sion, a more specific, smaller task en route to achieving the larger one.
Following this are several attempts by Woody and Buzz to escape,
each one thwarted by a new obstacle: the door is locked, the room is
populated by frightening, deformed toys {that are, apparently, canni¬
bals), the dog Scud bars their escape. While contending with these ob¬
stacles, a cutaway to Andy’s room occurs, where the other toys hear of
Woody’s disappearance and see it as conclusive evidence of his guilt.
This cutaway serves to remind us of Woody’s overall objective even as
the characters concern themselves with the more specific problem of
trying to get out of Sid’s house.
During their escape from the dog Scud, Woody and Buzz split up,
and Buzz finds temporary refuge in a room where the television adver¬
tises Buzz Lightyear dolls. This leads to the major culmination—that is,
turning point—in Buzz’s character arc (see text box p. 33). Suffering
from the beginning under the delusion that he is a real superhero and
not a simple toy, Buzz blunders through the story until he wtnesses the
television commercial, whose disillusioning message is reinforced soon
afterward by Buzz’s failed attempt to fly out the window (the first payoff
of his “flight” in Andy’s bedroom during the second sequence).
After his failure to fly, Buzz is retrieved by Hannah, bringing on the
end of the sequence. Woody’s objective—to escape Sid’s house with
Buzz—has been resolved in the negative. Far from escaping, Woody is
now in hiding and Buzz has undergone a crushing disillusionment.
Buzz’s experience of disillusionment is noteworthy because it brings
about a significant mood and tone shift. Buzz’s realization and the ac¬
tions he takes—accentuated by the music—bring us out of comedy. lust
as dramas can suffer if they are relentlessly downbeat, and thus employ
moments of “comic relief,” so too comedies can be tiring if they are
funny all the time, and benefit from moments of “dramatic relief,”
Toy Story: Firing on All Eight
Character Arc
This notion contrasts a character’s want with his or her need, and
how the relationship between the two plays out in the course of a
story. The paradigm works like this: a character begins the second
act with a conscious desire (e.g., Woody wants to regain his place
at the top of the heap] and an unconscious need (e.g,. Woody needs
to realize that Andy’s love cannot be wllied; he must accept his
place in the hierarchy, wherever it may be). During the course of pur¬
suing his desire, he suffers sufficiently to become conscious of his
need and let go of his want. This process of transformation is the
character arc. In Toy Story, three characters—Woody, Buzz, and
Sid—go through significant transformations, and several of the
minor characters go through minor ones.
Thedangerfor a writer of thinking in terms of character arc is the
temptation to force characters to change in a way that fits the
scheme, resulting in a shallow character and/or a predictable out¬
come. The best defense against this is to develop a story that is
significantly challenging enough for the character as to force such a
transformation.
Quite often, the character arc of the protagonist is what defines
the theme of the picture, contained in the truth the character
doesn’t realize until after his or her transformation.
Sequence F: The Big One
The sixth sequence, which runs just over eleven minutes, finds a subtle
but signibcaut shift in tension from the previous one. The objective re¬
mains the same—Woody wants to escape from Sid’s house with Buzz—
but Woody has during this sequence one new, significant obstade:
Buzz’s loss of interest in trying to escape, owing to his disillusionment.
The dramatic question of the sequence becomes: can Woody overcome
Buzz’s lack of cooperation in order to escape from Sid’s house with
him? This is a new tension not present in Sequence E.
The sequence begins with Woody falling out ofthe closet and finding
Buzz participating in a teapayty-with two of Hannah’s decapitated dolls
(a payoff of Sid’s ''triple bypass brain transplant” of the preAhous se¬
quence). Woody uses a ruse to get Hannah out of the room so he can
rescue Buzz, and immediately this neAv problem—Buzz’s loss of interest
in the hght—asserts itself. The “first act” of Sequence F thus ends after
34
SCREENWRIUNG
Toy Story: Firing on All Eight
35
its first two minutes. Woody deals with this new problem by striking
Buzz with his own dismembered arm to shock him back to reality^ then
leads him to Sid’s room, where an open window promises an escape
route at last. Woody even succeeds in tossing a string of Christmas lights
to Andy's toys across the yard^ and we are given another glimpse of a
possible ending, since escape seems so easily mthin reach.
Buzz refuses to cooperate, though, and resists Woody’s desperate
pleas. As a result, Andy’s toys rebuff Woody, and audience expectation
goes from hope to fear, in a classic example of a reversal (see text box,
page 168). Soon after Andy’s toys abandon Woody, Sid reappears in the
room with a new and more dangerous explosive device (the anticipation
for which was planted in the previous sequence) and the situation dete¬
riorates rapidly. Woody succeeds in hiding, but Buzz refuses to move
and is thus chosen by Sid to be the victim.
A timely thunderstorm—one of the rare coincidences that actually
helps the protagonist—delays the planned demolition, and Sid sets the
alarm clock and creates a deadline: “Tomorrow’s forecast: sunny.” The
choice of a thunderstorm is noteworthy because its dark, stormy atmo¬
sphere enhances the sense of hopelessness the characters—and the audi¬
ence—will soon feel,
The “sequence third act” begins when Sid is asleep. Buzz is taped to
a rocket and Woody is trapped beneath a milk crate. Here, Woody
makes one last desperate plea for help to Buzz: “You’ve got to help me
get out of here so we can make a break for it.” Buzz again refuses to
cooperate, and Woody at long last gives up, and urges Buzz to forget
about him and escape on his own, admitting for the first time his own
fears and frailties about being accepted by Andy.
Here we arrive at the second, or main, culmination of the picture,
the end of the second act, in which the main tension—“Will Woody
regain his spot as Andy’s favorite toy?”—is resolved, not because Andy
has accepted or rejected Woody, but rather, because Woody stops trying
to achieve this goal. At Woody’s moment of greatest extremity—when
all appears lost^he goes through his own crushing disillusionment, re¬
alizing that he cannot make Andy love him, and that all his efforts to
do so—which has led to the series of calamities that constitute the
story—were futile. At this moment, the contradiction between the pro¬
tagonist’s desire—to regain his position as Andy’s favorite toy—and his
need—to realize that he cannot will Andy’s love and the path to wisdom
lies in acceptance—is resolved, making clear the theme of the picture,
i.e., the basic truth it seeks to explore and express.
In these moments of despair, a hint of hope arrives when Buzz, lis¬
tening to Woody’s w^oids about how much better it is to be a toy than
a space ranger, looks at the bottom of his foot, where Andy had in¬
scribed his name. This visual payoff sets up a major shift in tension to
follow in the third act.
Sequence G; “The Toys Are Aiive!”
The clearing up of the thunderstorm—and the coming of dawn—are
the atmospheric elements that enhance the change of mood accompa¬
nying the arrival of the third act. Even as Woody continues to despair,
Buzz, his spirits revived, begins to affect a rescue, picking up on a dan¬
gling cause of the previous sequence—Woody’s plea for help. Buzz an¬
nounces his arrival with another dangling cause: “Come on, Sheriff.
There’s a kid over in that house who needs us.” Even as Buzz begins to
push the milk crate in order to free Woody, the moving van pulls up
next door, reminding us of the imminent deadline. The sudden alliance
between two characters who have spent all of the preceding scenes in
bitter conflict adds a special emotional surge to the picture.
A new problem arises as soon as Woody is freed from the milk
crate—the noise of the rescue almost awahens Sid. In a quick example
of preparation by contrast, Sid falls back to sleep, Buzz and Woody
breathe a sigh of relief, then the alarm clock goes off, awakening Sid
after all. With Sid’s seizure of Buzz for the rocket ride downstairs,
Woody appeals to Sid’s toys for help, and with another dangling
cause—“We’re going to have to break a few rules, but . . we arrive
at the end of the “first act” of sequence G, at which point the tension
of the sequence is in play: will Woody be able to rescue Buzz before he’s
blown up by Sid?
A cutaway to Andy dejectedly leaving his home without his two fa¬
vorite toys reminds us again of the deadline of the move as a backdrop
to the more urgent deadline of Buzz’s imminent demise, and reinforces
the stakes involved in any failure by Woody to achieve his objective.
The cutaway also allows the storytellers to return to Woody laying
out his plan with Side’s toys, without the andience knowing what pre¬
cisely the plan is. In this case, the storytellers have opted for mystery
rather than irony. Another option would have been to reveal to the au¬
dience the plan in detail, creating tension during its execution, playing
on our hopes and fears as various phases are carried out.
36
37
SCREENWRITING
Instead, while the objective is made clear—rescue Buzz—the means
are left mysterious, and anticipation is created not only by dramatic ten¬
sion—will they succeed in rescuing Buzz?—but also through promising
an answer to the mystery—what precisely is their plan? In this, the
viewer is in a mid-level position as to dramatic irony—we know more
than Sid, but less than Woody. The approach chosen has the effect of
saving time at a point in the film when speed is crucial. The tempo of
the third act tends to accelerate, leading to the resolution as an emo¬
tional high point. Laying out a plan in considerable detail runs the risk
of dragging out the sequence, which, as written, runs only eight and a
half minutes.
The execution of the caper constitutes the bulk of the sequence’s sec¬
ond act—Woody and the other toys act to achieve their objective, over¬
come obstacles, and succeed in saving Buzz’s life. In the process, Sid’s
character undergoes his own transformation—his perception of and at¬
titude toward toys changes.
As soon as Woody and Buzz shake hands, marking the positive reso¬
lution to the tension of the sequence, the honk of a horn reminds them
(and the audience) of the moving deadline, and the final sequence be-
gins.
Sequence H: A Fmalelhat Soars
The chase in the finai sequence of Toy Story, which runs just under ten
minutes, is among the most successfully realized in cinema history. The
tension of the sequence is obvious at the outset and has been carefully
set up and nurtured throughout the preceding action—Woody and
Buzz have to get on the moving van before it drives away and the two
are lost forever. The sequence is executed as a rapid series of alterna¬
tions between hope and fear, between obstacles encountered, obstacles
overcome, and new obstacles. Many of the obstacles, and the solutions
to them, arise from elements carefully set up and/or planted previously.
The deadline of the family move was set up in the opening minutes
of the him. The first obstacle—the dog Scud’s interference—is an unin¬
tended consequence of Woody’s plan to rescue Buzz. When Buzz jumps
onto Scud—showing his willingness to lay down his life for Woody—
the complete transformation of their relationship is made vivid.
Woody’s solution to the Scud problem—employing RC, the remote-
controlled car, to rescue Buzz—is a payoff of its use in getting Woody
Toy Story: Firing on All Eight
into trouble in Sequence Q The hope that arises from Woody’s rescue
of Buzz using RC is dashed when the other toys rise up against Woody
and interfere with the rescue; this is a payoff of their chronic misunder¬
standing of Woody’s real intentions, and the other toys’ ignorance of
Woody’s now-positive relationship with Buzz.
The new setback that arises when the toys throw Woody out the back
of the truck is solved rather inadvertently when Woody winds up on
the front of RC, united again with Buzz. When the other toys see the
three—RC, Woody, and Buzz—approaching, the moment of recogni¬
tion occurs—they realize the mistake of their ways—and join at last in
the rescue effort.
The hope that arises from this development is an opportunity for
another reversal, and here the storytellers deliver once again. RC’s bat¬
tery starts to fade Just as rescue seems imminent. When the van goes
around a coiner, Slink, the '"stretchy dog,” is stretched to the limit and
disaster looms. At last, Slink lets go, and Woody, Buzz, and RC come to
a stop in the middle of the road, the moving van fading in the distance.
Woody suddenly comes up with a solution—lighting the rocket for pro¬
pulsion—and even has the match ready, which was planted in Sequence
G- This newfound hope is an opportunity for yet another reversal, when
a car goes by and its wind blows the match out.
Here we arrive at what is sometimes called the black moment, late in
the third act, when all seems truly lost. Here, the storyliellers rely on
another payoff—the magnifying glass Sid had used earlier on Woody—to
effect the reversal. When W^oody succeeds in lighting the rocket using
Buzz’s helmet as a magnifying glass, the hopes of the audience soar—
literally as well as figuratively—despite Woody’s ominous observation
that "hockets explode.” Just before this deadline is realized, Buzz jetti¬
sons the rocket and the resolution of the picture is at hand, in the sec¬
ond payoff of ‘Tailing with style.”
When Woody and Buzz arrive safely on the seat next to Andy, all the
signiheant lines of dramatic tension, dangling causes, and deadlines
have been resolved or dosed off. A thread of ironic tension remains in
that the humans still don’t know about the secret life of toys^ hut when
Woody and Buzz '"freeze” in order to pretend they he just toys, even this
tension is rendered moot.
The epilogue is very brief, though it is very necessary after such an
extraordinarily emotional roller coaster of a sequence, It is set at the
following Christmas (a payoff of Woody’s hrst-sequence observation
that birthdays and Christmases are always the hardest for the toys), uti-
38
SCREEN WRITING
Joy Story: Firing on All Eight
39
lizes the technique of payoff skillfully, with the soldiers doing their mis¬
sion once again, the toys listening in rapt attention to their reports, Bo
Peep connecting at last with Woody (picking up at last a dangling cause
from the opening sequence—her invitation to '‘come visit any time—
Vm only a couple of blocks away”)> and Mr. Potato Head getting his
Mrs. Potato Plead at last (another payoff from the opening sequence).
>
\
ToysTOJRy
Sequence Breakdown
Seq.
DesciLption
ACT I
Running
Leng;th Time
A Opennig titles to Buzz's arrival oji the bed. Unifying 13:40
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Frotagcfiist Woody
Objective: To reassure the toys that the birthday part)^
poses no threat.
Point of attack: Buzz’s arrival
B Buzz’s appearance to Woody’s assertion that he’s still 6:00
Andy’s favorite toy. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist: Woody. Objective: To disarm the threat that
Buzz poses to his position,
Predicament Buzz has usurped Woody’s position as
Andy’s favorite toy, Woody has to try to get his
position back.
13:40
(13%)
19:40
(25%)
C
D
E
F
ACT n
(Maui tension: Will Woody be able reclaim his place at the top?)
Musical interlude showing Buzz’s ascendanc)’, followed 9:30
by Woody’s attempts to attack Buzz verbally and
physically that lead to his bouncing Buzz out of the
window by mistake. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension
Protagonist: Woody. Objective: To attack Buzz so as to
regain his position,
Buzz and Woody get stranded at gas station, wind up at 9:48
Pizza Planet, only to be captured by Sid. Unifying
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagcnist Woody.
Objective: To get Buzz back home,
FiTsf Culmination: Woody almost gets Buzz into the
stroller al Pizza Planet (d8%).
Woody and Buzz make several unsuccessful attempts at 9:45
escape, which leads inadvertently to Buzz’s realization
that he’s not the real Buzz Lighp'^ear. U?iifying Aspect.
Dramatic Tension. ?Tctagc7\ist. WOc^dy. Ohjective: To
escape from Sid’s place vdth Buzz.
Woody attempts to reAuve Buzz’s spirits, but Mnds up 10:54
imprisoned by Sid and doomed. Unifying Aspect:
Dramatic Tension. Woodv. Objective-.To get
Buzz to cooperate so they cans get out of Sid’s place,
Second Culmination: Woodyis hnpiisoned with no
escape; Buzz is discouraged and awaits the end.
29:00
(37%)
38:48
(51%)
48:33
(63%)
59:27
(78%)
I
40
SCREENWRITI NG
ACT III
G The m^iin tension has been resolved as to Woody’s
aspirations—he no longer desires to suppress Buzz in
order to regain his spot as And/s favorite. Now the
tension shifts—will Buzz and Woody together make it
back before Andy moves? In this sequence. Woody
enlists the other toys in a plan to defeat Sid, and
successfully carries it out. Unifying Aspect Dramatic
Tension, Protagonist. Woody. Objective: To carry out his
plan.
H Climactic chase to the moving van. Unifying Aspect:
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Woody. Objective: To get
on van with Buzz,
Resohttion: Woody and Buzz make it to Andy’s car.
Epilogue: Brief wrap-up scene at new house.
7:46 1:07:13
(89%)
9:16 1:16:29
{ 100 %)
The Shop Around the Corner:
Fractured Symmetry
The sixth collaboration between screenwriter Samson Raphaelson and
director Ernst Lubitsch, this picture, based on a stage play by Hungarian
playwright Miklos Laszlo, appeared in 1940. Its basic kernel—about bit¬
ter rivals who have unwittingly fallen in love with each other—has
proven durable, finding itself remade as In the Good Old Summertime
(1949) and more recently as Yoiive Got Mail (1998).
It is a challenge for study because in so many ways it violates the
paradigm laid out in the classic construction of a movie like Joy Story,
In fact, it breaks one of the most basic of the ^‘ruks"' of screenwriting:
it does not have a protagonist wdth a strong objective, much at stake,
and a relentless drive tow^ard achieving that objective over any obstacles
that may come in the way.
Because it is a very successbil picture despite these violations, study¬
ing it can open the mind to look beyond conventions to the deeper level
at which a film can engage its audience. That deeper level, in this case, is
the use of Tool #3—dramatic irony—rather than Tool #4 —dramatic
tension. The use of a different tool can change the landscape ofa picture
substantially, while allowing it to achieve its most baste objective: keep¬
ing the audience wondering what’s going to happen next.
The construction of the sequences in The Shop is again a contrast to
Toy Story: the dramatic tension that unifies six of them tends to be less
strident, with dramatic irony shoring up audience interest, and two of
them are ensemble pieces, unified by time and place rather than a pro-
— 41 —
42
43
SCREENWRITING
tagonist with an objective. Further, The Shop Around the Corner con¬
tains a major subplot. As a result, all of the sequences include material
from that subplot in addition to the main plot, and two of the sequences
are concerned primarily with the subplot.
Aside from being valuable as an object of study for its unconven¬
tional approach to engaging audience attention, The Shop Around the
Corner is a very rich example of several other screenwriting techniques:
the use of indirection (primarily verbal—see text box, page 31), the ex¬
tensive use of props and ‘‘business” for the actors, and the planting and
payoff of motifs.
Sequence A: Getting Acquainted
The first sequence runs eight and a half minutes and is unified by place
(the shop) and time (one morning). It has no identifiable protagonist
and no thread of dramatic tension.
The picture actually begins with a title that is not in the script: “This
is the story of Matuschek and Company—of Mr. Matuschek and the
people who work for him. It is just around the corner from Andrassy
Street—on Balto Street, in Budapest, Hungary,” This amounts to a sub¬
tle acknowledgement of the predominant storytelling pattern that audi¬
ences were (and still are) used to—character with objective—and a way
of signaling to the audience that what follows will be somewhat differ¬
ent. Since the end of the first act of the movie occurs as a surprise twist,
without any hint of the direction of the story prior to this, there is a
danger the audience attention will drift. The title is, in effect, a subtle
reassurance that the storytellers know what they’re doing, and that the
slow start of the picture from a plot viewpoint is not an accident.
In the 1998 remake YotTve Cot Mail, the storytellers dealt with this
problem by eliminating the twist—the audience knows from the get-go
the leading man and woman are lovers, even before we (and they) find
out they are rivals. The price the storytellers paid for that choice is that
while the direction of the story is made clear immediately, the audience
is now way ahead of the characters, waiting for them to catch up, and
this lends the film a sense of slowness and predictability.
As in Toy Story, the opening images of The Shop Around the Corner
present something of a puzzle—a young man riding a delivery bicycle
down a busy street and stopping next to another man, who is waiting
alone on a sidewalk. The writing on the side of the bicycle, and that of
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
the shop behind them—“Matuschek ^ Company: Novelties and Leath-
erware” provides the first information about the two. The exposition
technique that follows is exposition as ammunition (see text box on page
22), with identifiable subtext in the dialogue, subtext that belies its out¬
ward appearance of simple chatter. Pepi’s opening line, “Always the first
one, eh?” is not a neutral observation—it is a subtle attack, which pro¬
vokes a defense from Pirovitch: “It doesn’t hurt to be early” Pepi s
reply is a renewed attack: “Why? Who sees you? Me. Who sees me? You.
What does it get us? Can we give each other a raise? No,”
By listening to them trade alternate accusations of disobedience and
obsequiousness, we learn they work in a shop for a Mr. Matuschek, that
one of them, Pirovitch, is always tjqdng to impress the boss while the
other, Pepi, is always slaving away for Mr. Matuschek’s wife on com¬
pany time. Soon Flora appears, followed at last by Kralik, who immedi¬
ately asks Pepi to go to the drugstore to get some bicarbonate of
soda—a motif used twice Later in the scene. Vadas next appears; his loud
clothing and cocky attitude immediately identify him as a fop, and his
relationship to everyone is immediately shown as antagonistic. A con¬
versation about Kralikh dinner the previous night with the boss yields
more information, this time about Kralik: he’s the favorite of the boss
(and thus one level above everyone else), and he has an open, active
mind.
Pepi returns with the bicarbonate of soda (its first payoff)—which
Vadas seizes upon as a way to attack Kralik, as it reflects poorly on Mrs.
Matuschek s cooking. During the ensuing argument, Matuschek arrives
in a taxi, which provides an opportunity for planting another motif—
PirovitcMs attempt to open the door for the boss (he’s beaten to it this
time by Pepi). Mr. Matuschek asks Pepi to get him some bicarbonate of
soda (the second payoff of the motif) and leads theni all inside the shop.
In just over four minutes, all of the workers in the shop have been
introduced, as have their various relationships. No one character’s ob¬
jective carries the scene; rather, atcdience engagement is achieved first
through curiosity, then by following the playing out of the various con¬
flicts between the characters.
Once inside the shop, Kralik discloses to Pirovitch his anonymous
correspondence with a woman,on “inteiieaual snbieclsA Here, instead
of delivering exposition through argumentation, curiosity is used.
Kralik rather secretively asks Pirovitch: “Psst. Want to hear something?”
Kralik then proceeds to read a few snippets from a letter without reveal¬
ing what it is he’s reading from. After Pirovitch becomes curious (re-
44
45
SCREENWRITING
fleeting the audience's curiosity), Kralik only deepens the mystery by
beginning a roundabout tale of looking in the newspapers for encyclo¬
pedias because he wanted to know how people live in Brazil. FinaJJy,
after Pirovitch is completely bewildered, Kralik clarifies the mystery he
created: he's corresponding anonymously with a woman, and neither of
them knows what the other does for a living—crucial information the
audience needs to make sense of what happens shortly afterward. The
scene also reinforces the sense that Kralik is intellectually curious and
values self-improvement.
The scene is interrupted by Mr. Matuschek, who wants Kralik's opin¬
ion about a cigarette box he's thinking of bu-}dng from a wholesaler. The
cigarette box is an important motif that is revisited many times
throughout the picture. Its use here is significant in that it's a prop—i.e.,
a visual element—which is used to express the relationships between
Mr. Matuschek, Kralik, and the others in the store: Mr. Matuschek ad¬
mires Kralik and respects his opinion, but sometimes resents Kralik for
being too smart, while the others in the shop lack any real insight, or
the courage to stand up to the boss.
This scene is the first in the picture to employ dramatic tension—
Matuschek serves as the protagonist of the scene, and his objective is
Kralik's approval for his decision to go ahead with the box. The obstacle
is Kralik's honest disapproval of tlie box; Mr. Matuschek counters by
trying to get others to agree with him. The resolution is negative—he
never wins Kralik over to his point of view. In the coda of the scene,
Mr. Matuschek takes a call from the cigarette-box seller and turns him
down: Kralik has won the argument. The scene also introduces another
motif—Matuschek's line about wanting an “honest opinion," and Piro-
vitch's craven response to it.
Sequence B: “I want a job”
The arrival of the female lead, Klara, marks the beginning of the second
sequence. It is unified by dramatic tension; its protagonist is Klara, and
her objective is securing employment. The first scene of the sequence is
remarkable in that in the space of four minutes, screenwriter Kaphaeh
son forcefully utilizes all four of the major screenwriting tools: dramatic
and ironic tension, dangling causes, and telegraphing.
Klara's dramatic objective (both in the scene and sequence) is made
clear within the first two minutes of her entrance, when she asks to
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
Motifs; Cinematic Poetry
Cinema is a thoroughly “concrete" medium. Unlike poetry and litera¬
ture, which employ words—which are abstractions—cinema uses
photographic images. Still, the use of f7?ot/fs offers the screenwriter
an opportunity to be poetic, creatirtg resonances throughout a film
that are analogous to rhyme in poetry. They come primarily in two
forms: verbal (lines of dialogue or ideas expressed in dialogue) or
visual (props or patterns of behavior). They are introduced (planted )—
usually surreptltiously-“by the writer, then brought up later In a dif¬
ferent context (pa/d off). They can be paid off more than once; a
motif repeated with variations for comic effect is a running gag.
roy5fo/y and The Shop Around the Corner are richly embroidered
with such motifs. When writing a script, keeping an eye out for oppor¬
tunities to plant such motifs is a good practice to maintain, and can
result in a more coherent and powerful screenplay, ft can be difficult
for a writer to anticipate where to plant motifs in the first draft—
when at that stage, it's best simply to note places where they might
come in handy, and insert them in a rewrite. Often a writer will see
places to pay off a motif first, and then figure out where to plant
them, hence the notion that a screenplay is written backv/ards—only
when a writer gets to the ending can he or she understand exactly
how to set up that ending.
Subsequent rewrites can provide opportunities for further em¬
broidery. The cigarette box m The Shop Around the Corner is a motif
that is paid off seven times during the course of the film.
speak to tlie boss, while Kralik, misinterpreting her intentions, tries to
sell her on various products (bringing the use of props again into play).
As soon as she discloses her real intent to Kralik, exposition resumes
in earnest—we discover Klara's extensive background as a salesgirl and
Kralik's nine years' experience at Matuschek & Company—all smuggled
to the audience during a vigorous'argurnent.
A brief interlude of drarnatic irony occurs late in tlie scene, when
Mr. Matuschek overhears Kralik telling Klara that he knows his boss
inside out and can predict hisieaction. Mr. Matuschek, assuming Klara
is there to buy something, sit& her down and assures her the word “im¬
possible" is not in bis vocabulary. This allows the audience to e?cpen-
ence the opening part of the scene—when Klara was trying to get a job
^nd the audience didn't know it—through the prism of irony, because
now we do know whatT coming and Mr. Matuschek does not.
46
47
SCREENWRITING
Figure 1. Sequence B of The Shop Around the Corner {1940) is unified by
Klara's desire to get a job at Matuschek and Company. The means she
uses—demonstrating her salesmanship—utilizes a prop (the cigarette
box) that was introduced in the opening sequence. The planting and payoff
of such motifs as the cigarette box, the wallet, and the bonuses make it
an unusually richly textured film. (Frame enlargement)
When Mr, Matuschek replies to Klara's job request with an ‘'Impos¬
sible!'* the tension of tine scene is resolved in the negative: Klara does
not get the job. Afterward^ Klara tells Kralik “I have to have a job!”—
initiating a dangling cause—and he replies that he’ll call her during in¬
ventory in two weeks—an appointment.
Kralik is called away to Matuschek's office, where Matuschek pro¬
ceeds to ask him a series of questions about the dinner party of the night
before. The exchange is an example of the masterful use of indirection
(see text box, page 31): on the surface, Mr. Matuschek is asking Kralik
how he liked the previous night's party; in the subtext, he is warning
Kralik to stay away from his wife, concluding with the line: “Mrs.
Matuschek thinks an awful lot of you, and I think an awful lot of
Mrs. Matuschek.”
This scene is interrupted by Vadas, who announces he has a buyer
for the controversial cigarette box (its first payoff). When the “buyer”
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
turns out to he none other than Klara, who is still hanging around the
shop, Mr. Matuschek picks up where he left off earlier and tries to get
' her to agree with him that the box is a good product. She takes advan¬
tage of the situation to demonstrate her considerable salesmanship by
selling the box to a customer at above the asldng price. Klara's success
brings the scene and sequence to a positive resolution: Klara gets the
job (though this is only implied; we do not get a confirmation of this
until the following sequence). The stoiytellers' choice of the already-
y planted cigarette box as the means by which Klara gets her job is not an
accident: the shop is readily seen to be full of novelties, and any of these
• could have served the same function. The cigarette box, though, is al¬
ready imbued with meaning, having been the battleground between
» Matuschek and Kralik. In using it here, it picks up additional layers of
meaning and grows in potency. This kind of embroidery is what distin-
' guishes a truly outstanding screenplay from one that is merely adequate.
The sequence ends with Matuschek asking one more time for Kral-
ik’s honest opinion, a request overheard by Piiovitch, who quickly
slinks away—the second payoff of that motif.
Sequence C: The Revelation
»
The third sequence, which runs over sixteen minutes, is unified by dra¬
matic tension: the protagonist is Kralik, and his objective is the night
off. It also contains a revelation for the audience that initiates the main
tension of the film,
The function oF the first part of the sequence is the same as in the
opening sequence: exposition. This is because several months have
, passed since the previous scene, and the audience needs to be caught
up. The movie thus revisits the initial location and time of day, with
^ Pirovitch waiting for the shop taopen. The shop "window displays the
cigarette boxes, reduced considerably in price, the second payoff of that
j motif. This one image tells a story: Klara won the argument about the
' boxes, but Kralik was ultimately right (see Figure 1).
' Kralik arrives, and immediately announces he has a dinner date that
1 evening at 8:30—an appointment that will become the central interest
I ofthe next three sequences. Pirovitch assumes it is with the boss; Kralik
1 tells him the boss never invites him any more, to which Pirovitch re-
i marks how difficult it is to get along "with him these days—important
48
49
SCREENWRITING
1
►
I
Figure 2. The opening scene of Sequence C of The Shop Around the Cor¬
ner (1940) closes off two dangling causes left over from the previous se¬
quence: the issue of Matuschek buying the cigarette boxes, and Kralik’s
prediction that they are not a wise investment. This image reveals that Ma¬
tuschek did go ahead with the purchase, but Kralik was proven correct.
Shortly afterward, it is revealed that Klara got the job, providing the resolu¬
tion to the dramatic tension of Sequence B. (Frame enlargement)
information for the ‘"B” plot, which is soon to blossom. Kralik next an¬
nounces he plans to ask Mr. Matuschek for a raise—another echo of
the opening sequence, when the issue of raises was brought up—and a
dangling cause that will be picked up repeatedly during the next Two
sequences.
Klara's arriyal at this point provides an opportunity for the storytell¬
ers to smuggle in yet more exposition in an argument she has with
Kralik over a green blouse with yellow dots on it, planting that wsual
motif. The thrust of that exposition is that IClara and Kralik have had a
very antagonistic relationship.
In a subsequent conversation with Pirovitch, Kralik discloses his plan
to ask the girl with whom he's been anonymously corresponding to
marry him, Their discussion is pregnant with the future—Kralik lays
out his hope—that she’s beautiful but not too beautiful (otherwise she
SPECIAL
CLERRRNCE SALE
OCHI TCHORNMfl
CIGARETTE BOXESJ
^&ciuc<$d
550 TO 229
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
may not like him)—and his fear—that he won't find her attractive. He
compares her to a bonus check whose envelope he has not yet opened—
the possibilities are limitless until you open it. The use of this analogy
plants the motif of the bonus, paid off (literally) in the last sequence,
and echoes the nootifof the raise.
A taxi now arrives, and Pirovitch, in the payoff of yet another motif
from the opening scene, rushes to the taxi and opens the door (thinking
it’s Mr. Matuschek) only to have Vadas step out, Yadas is decked out in
even more expensive clothing, shows off a big wad of cash. Like Piro-
vitch’s remarks about how difficult the boss has been lately, Vadas's
behavior is part of the setup of the major subplot involving Mrs. Matu¬
schek.
Mr. Matuschek now arrives and once again Pirovitch is beaten To the
punch by Pepi, who opens the door for the boss. Matuschek looks at
the shop-window display with disapproval, and announces everyone
will stay late that night to redecorate—an appointment that threatens
Kralik’s dinner date. Kralik reacts with alarm, and, unknown to him, so
does Klara, who confides to Ilona that she has a date at 8:30 that night,
and tells her she has to get out of it somehow'—a dangling cause picked
up a few scenes hence.
With the disclosure that Kralik and Klara have unknowingly been
corresponding with each other, we arrive at the end of the first act of
the picture. Kralik is the protagonist. What he wants is the girl. The
problem is that he doesn’t know that the girl he loves is also the girl he
hates. This is an example of a predicament that is invisible to the protag¬
onist. Unlike a film relying on dramatic tension, in which the first act
ends when the character becomes aware of his objective and begins his
pursuit of it, in a stor)' that relies on ironic tension, the character is
unaware of the problem he faces. The main tension in this case exists
solely in the audience and not in any of the characters onscreen. True
enough, Kralik does h^^YQ prohlems, which can create tension for him—
for example, he worries abo at whether he'll find the girt he's been corre¬
sponding with attractive, but he is unaware of the predicament that
powers the film, the main tension, which can be best stated as: Will
Kralik wind up -with Klara despite the misunderstanding? The overrid¬
ing question for the audience until the middle of the film is; what will
happen when the truth cornes out? In this, the audience’s hopes (that
they’ll wind up together) and. fears (that they won't) play out indepen¬
dently of the protagonist’s hopes and fears, because for most of the pic¬
ture the protagonist is not aware of the situation.
50
Figure 3. The blocking helps establish the dramatic irony of this scene in
Sequence C of The Shop Around the Corner (1940). Kralik has just given
Pepi the night off, inspiring Klara to ask for the same. Kralik's back is
turned so he can’t see Klara's reaction, but the audience can. Note the
use of props by the actors: almost all the scenes in the script specify busi¬
ness for the actors—the handling and sorting of luggage and other sales
Items, along with documents, keys, pencils, and various other objects that
help keep the scenes dynamic. (Frame enlargement)
Another consequence of the fact that the tension is purely in the au¬
dience is that there is no clearly articulated point of attack in the pic¬
ture—no hint of the direction of the story until the predicament is
established. It's important not to give a hint, or the surprise is lost. The
opening title, discussed earlier, serves subtly the function of a point of
attack, insofar as it lays out in very broad strokes what the story will be
about, i.e., people in a shop, Klara's arrival can also be seen as a point
of attack, since before she arrived, the stoiy could not have unfolded as
it did. But Klara's arrival serves this function only in retrospect; when
she enters, she is just another of the many people trying to make a
living.
Usually a predicament is established at the end of a sequence, reflect¬
ing the function of sequences as subunits of a character's overall objec¬
tive. That this one occurs in the middle of one demonstrates the
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
51
disjunction between the tensions created in the individual sequences
and the overall main tension, at least at this point in the film. In Toy
Story, the tension of the third sequence is identical to the main tension:
Woody wants to regain his top spot against the usurper Buzz. In The
Shop Around the Corner, the tension of the third sequence revolves
around Kralik getting the night off.
From the moment the audience realizes that Kralik and Klara are the
two anonymous lovers, every subsequent scene Invohhng them, until
the final minute of the film, is imbued with dramatic irony. Even Klara's
first line after the revelation occurs—her declaration to Ilona that she
plans to wear the polka-dotted blouse to the cafe that night—is more
than simply a payoff of a motif, It has an added meaning, since the man
she's trying to impress with the blouse has just, unknown to her, criti¬
cized it.
In the remainder of the sequence, while Kralik's and Klara's concerns
are paramount, the major subplot of Mi. Matuschek’s wife gradually
grows in prominence, though it is not completely independent of the
main plot—in fact, it asserts itself as an obstacle to Kralik's objective of
getting the girl of his dreams.
Once everyone is inside the shop, Mr. Matuschek is shown on the
phone talking to his wife, who seems to be running through her money
very quickly. He promises to send her more, a dangling cause that is
picked up at the end of the sequence. As soon as he hangs up, Kralik
enters to ask for a raise, picking up on the dangling cause from the pre¬
vious scene,Mr. Matuschek coldly puts him off before he can even ask;
afterward Kralik expresses his frustration to Pirovitch, who cautions
him not to do anything rash. During their conversation, Vadas, listening
in, reacts rvith alarm to Pirovitch’s suggestion that Matuschek is having
trouble with his wife. Like Matuschek’s phone conversation with his
wife, this is part of the setup for the marital affair subplot.
Pirovitch succeeds in calming down Kralik, who heads to the stock
room to work with Klara and Pepi. Here, Pepi asks for the night off,
claiming he's a child. Kralik assures him he'll w^ork it out Mth the boss.
The ease with which Pepi gets the night off is readily noticed by Klara,
but Kralik does not notice her reaction. The resulting scene shows mas¬
terful use of both dramatic and ironic tension as well as indirection.
is not completely clear what Kralik is ituending to ask Matuschek in this
scene; he might: plausibly be planning to ask for a raise or for the night off. In
the screenplay Kralik only says that what he wants to talk about is “important
to him."
52
SCREENWRITING
The Shop Around the Comer: Fractured Symmetry
53
Subplots
When a writer has an initial inspiration for a feature-length script and
is contemplating how to develop it, he or she is always faced with a
Joasic choice: whether to make it a long story or a broad one. A
■'long'’ story concerns itself primarily with a protagonist experience
ing a succession of events, and a “broad'' one introduces one or
more subplots that run in parallel to the protagonist’s story, involv^
ing subordinate characters. The choice is independent of the
amount of time portrayed in a film. Subplots are often informally re¬
ferred to alphabetically—the plot is the main story, and the “B”
plot one of the subplots, plot if there is another, and so on.
Subplots, like dramatically structured main plots, have a protago¬
nist with an objective, and follow the same three-act shape of setup,
development, and resolution, (thus they almost invariably have a
minimum of three scenes), and often their resolution involves a cul¬
minating moment that changes the subplot character, in a small-
scale echo of the protagonist's character arc. Subplots basically
have three functions: one, the p/of function—they intersect with the
main plot to help or hinder the protagonist: two, the thematic func¬
tion—they show variations on the main theme of the picture by pre¬
senting alternating ways in which characters deal with the situation
the protagonist may himself be confronting; and three, the structural
function—by cutting away from the main plot to a subplot, especially
at moments of high suspense, the storyteller can retard the action
and by thus delaying it intensify the anticipation.
The subplot in The Shop Around the Corner serves all of these
functions. Matuschek is the protagonist; his objective is to discover
who his wife is sleeping with and punish him; the subplot poses a
major obstacle to Kralik, it presents a variation on the theme of se¬
cret lovers and mistaken identity, and it’s used at critical times to
cut away from the suspense surrounding Kralik’s and Klara's rela¬
tionship.
Klara is the protagonist of the scene. Her objective is getting the
night off and the chief obstacle is that the person who can get her the
night off is her antagonistj Kralik. She goes about pursuing her objective
using indirection: instead of coming right out and asking him, she acts
extremely nice to hinij complimenting him as a boss> claiming that she's
learned a lot from him> and even thanking him for telling her not to
wear the green blouse with the yellow dots—the second payoff of that
motif All the while, she’s helping him rearrange luggage—business that
the actors are given by the storytellers to enrich and render visual the
verbal aspect of their interaction. In addition to the dramatic irony of
Klara using subterfuge to manipulate Kralik, the whole scene plays, too,
with the subtle line of irony tliat, unknown to Klara, the person she
hopes to meet by getting the night off is none other than the man she's
asking to help her get the night off.
When at last she judges the moment is right, she asks him the big
question. This is the moment of recognition for Kralik, who, outraged
at realizing her game, rejects her request. Both dramatic and ironic ten¬
sion are simultaneously resolved. In the stormy aftermath, Klara tells
him she does plan to wear the polka-dot blouse after all (its third pay¬
off), then beads out into the shop and pleads directly with Mr. Matu¬
schek. 'When Kralik piles on and also asks for the night off, Mr,
Matuschek explodes in a tirade, momentarily interrupted by a comic
interlude with a customer and an ill-timed personal phone call to Piro-
vitch. In the end, Mr. Matuschek saves his most bitter words for Kralik,
who responds that '‘perhaps it's time to call it a day”—a dangling cause
that is picked up in the following sequence.
The dramatic tension of the sequence—will Kralik get the night
off?—has seemingly been resolved with a positive outcome, but the
price paid in anguish makes it seen: a pyrrhic victory.
At this point, Mrs, Matuschek phones again, reminding Mr. Matu¬
schek to send more money. Matuschek asks Vadas to deliver it, closing
off the dangling cause introduced at the start of the sequence.
Sequence D: The Advantage of Being a Boss
The major subplot, or '‘B” plot—Mr. Matuscheks marital prob¬
lems—is the primar)^ focus of this sequence, which runs just under
fourteen minutes. It is unified by 4raiTLatic tension: it has a clear protag¬
onist, Mr. Matuschek, who has an objective—to discover who is sleep¬
ing with his wife.
His first order of business is to fire Kralik, the man he s convinced is
the guilty party. There is a brief scene of preparation by contrast before
he gets fired, in which Kralik straightens out his tie and the other em¬
ployees give him signals, of encouragentient as he heads into the boss's
office. When Kralik emerges afterward, he deLWers the news using indi¬
rection—Instead of telling them he's been fired, he reads aloud the letter
54
55
SCREENWRITING
Aftermath Scene
While the bulk of the tools discussed in this volume deal with creat¬
ing anticipation and otherwise directing the audience's attention
toward the future, it is worth briefly discussing a type of scene that
deals more with what just happened than with what is about to hap¬
pen: the aftermath scene or aftermath beat Like a scene of prepara“
tion, an aftermath scene provides punctuation in the story, allowing
the storyteller to lend emphasis to certain moments deemed impor¬
tant. They invariably follow emotionally charged scenes, and are usu¬
ally characterized by little or no dialogue or activity, and are heavily
atmospheric, often enhanced with music. Two of the most famous
aftermath scenes are contained in movies in this volume: the last
scenes of Nights of Cabiria and The Graduate. As with scenes of
preparation, aftermath scenes can usually be cut out without affect¬
ing the plot, but they have a profound impact on the emotional im¬
pact of a film.
of recommendation Matuschek had given him. He then uses a series of
props to expi'ess his inner state—he crushes underfoot the carnation he
was going to use as an identifier in liis anticipated meeting with his Lover
(first payoff of the carnation motif), then turns in the tools of his
trade—his sales record book, pencils, and key, the latter the planting of
a motif paid off in two sequences hence. Kralilc says his good-byes, and
Pirovitch assures him they will see each other again—a dangling cause
picked up later in the sequence.
A brief, silent aftermath seme (see text box, above) occurs after the
door slams behind Kralik and all the employees stand silently. The mo¬
ment is interrupted by a phone call to Mr. Matuschek, who excitedly
invites the caller to come over immediately. This in turn leads Matu¬
schek to let everyone go for the evening. Before he goes, Pirovitch leaves
a message for Kralik, telling him hedl be stopping by that night—
picking up on a dangling cause and setting up an appointment. After
this, Vadas approaches Mr. Matuschek and tries to invite himself to din¬
ner in another example of verbal indirection: he talks about how beauti¬
ful the dining room table is, and how wonderful it must look at a dinner
party, but never explicitly says what’s on his mind. This motif—
someone attempting to invite himself to dinner—is paid off in the last
sequence of the picture.
The Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
After everyone is gone, a private detective arrives and delivers the
news to Mr. Matuschek: Vadas is the employee having the affair with
Mrs. Matuschek, much to Mr. MatuschekT surprise, who had clearly
thought it was Kralik. Mr. Matuschek dismisses the private eye and,
emotionally devastated, attempts to kill himself. The effort is thwarted
by the timely arrival of Pepi. The suicide scene is done using visual indi¬
rection: we hear the gun and see the damage the buhet makes to a chan¬
delier, but never see Mr, Matuschek hre it.
A brief aftermath scene ends the sequence, with Pepi staring at a dis¬
traught but evidently unharmed Matuschek.
Sequence E: Fractured Symmetry
The ‘M’' plot resumes in this ten-minute sequence, which Ls again uni¬
fied by dramatic tension: Kralik as protagonist, whose objective is to
salvage the relationship "with his lover. It opens with Kralik and Piro-
Mtch arriving at the cafe so that Pirovitch can deliver a note to the un¬
known lover. The moment of recognition—at least for Kralik—is at
hand, and audience anticipation of that moment is inCensifted by retar¬
dation (see text box on page 24), derived through a running commen¬
tary by Pirovitch on the various women in the restaurant, then by his
partially obscured view of Klara, and finally by his roundabout way of
giving Kralik the news C‘if you don’t like Miss Novak, I can tell you
right now, you wont like this girl”).
When the moment of recognition comes at last to Kralik, the main
line of ironic tension is only partially resolved: now Kralik knows the
truth, but Klara does not. This asymmetrical treatment of the ironic
tension is noteworthy. It would have been entirely possible for the
storyteller to continue developing the dramatic irony purely symmetri¬
cally, with both characters remafoing in the dark until the resolution at
the end, whereupon both would recognize the mistake. By fracturing
the symmetry in this way, the screenwriter is able to explore the premise
from a new, fresh angle while in the middle of telling the story, in effect
giving the audience tv^^o hlrqs for the price of one: the first one about
two lovers with a mutual misunderstanding, and the second about a
man who pursues a ’svoman by using secret information he has about
her—i.e., her delusion about who he is. Such changes in the angle of
exploring a premise are central to the success of many movies, and Lack
56
57
SCREENWRITING
of such variations can make a film feel “one-note,” predictable, or
boring.
The scene ends with Kralik putting the note back into his pocket and
walking away from the cafe, intent on leaving Klara to wait in vain.
The film now switches to inside the cafe, where another scene of
preparation occurs between Klara and the waiter, who relates stories
about previous blind dates at the cafe, and how some had gone well, but
others hadn’t. These stories do more than stoke Klara's anxiety about
her anticipated date; they also advise the audience about what to hope
for and what to be afraid of—the function of a scene of preparation.
The dramatic irony of Kralik s expressed intent to leave her there hangs
heavily over the scene.
Kralik enters the cafe soon after the waiter departs and pretends to
run into Klara by accident. Henceforth, the scene takes on a traditional
dramatic shape: Kralik is the protagonist, and his objective is reconcilia¬
tion with Kiara. The emotional impact of the scene is of course greatly
intensified by the irony caused by Klara’s ignorance of the fact that
Kralik is the one for whom she’s waiting.
Kralik uses indirection in his attempt to break the news to Klara and
salvage their relationship. Instead of announcing that he’s the “dear
friend” of the correspondence, he talks about how little the really
know each other, and how he thought highly of her when she first
started working for him. He tells her that people seldom go to the trou¬
ble of scratching beneath the surface to find their inner truth—a suc¬
cinct statement of the theme of the picture. At one point he offers to
take the place of her date if he doesn’t show up—as close as he gets to
disclosing the truth about himself. Unfortunately, she rebuffs him at
every turn, at last calling him an “insignificant little clerk,” and the
scene is resolved in the negative: Kralik fails to woo her. Further, he fails
to tell her he’s the “dear friend,” and so Chat line of ironic tension is left
dangling as the scene ends.
This moment comes 58% of the way into the film, within range of a
first culmination. It represents a significant, plausible outcome of the
story: Kralik and Klara don’t wind up together. It is in fact the mirror
opposite of the resolution, which occurs in the last minute of the film.
But this moment actually fulfills two functions. In terms of overall
structure, it provides an emotional upheaval near the middle, but in
terms of the main plot line, it actually serves as more of a second culmi¬
nation—the end of the second act. The following sequence actually re¬
turns to tire main subplot, and when the film returns to the main plot
The Shop Around the Corner Fractured Symmetry
Figure 4. Klara calls Kralik an “insigniticant clerk,’^ prompting him to
abandon her at the cafe. This moment, occurring at the end of Sequence
E, proves to be the low point In their relationship and provides a reason¬
able glimpse of a possible outcome of the picture: the two never wind up
together, and Klara never finds out the identity of her pen pa!/lover. The
actual resolution is, of course, the mirror opposite. (Frame enlargement)
line in Sequence G, the dramatic question—Will Kralik wind up with
Klara despite the misunderstanding?—has undergone a significant
change.
Sequence F; The Keys to the Kingdom
This eleven-minute sequence h a contrast to the “dramatic relief” of
the previous two in its return to a more upbeat, comedic tone, and is
unified by dramatic tension, but only slightly so: the protagonist is
Kralik, and his objective is to take over the reins of the business, but
there is little in the way of obstacles.
After Pepi has a brief comic exchange uhth the doctor, he takes Kralik
in to see Mr. Matuschek, who is bedridden but in a good mood. Matu-
5chek rehires Kralik and elevates him to store manager, handing him
58
59
SCREENWRITING
the store key. The use of this prop not only pays off the motif estab¬
lished earlier when Kralik was saying his good-byes, it is also a visual
expression of the change in their relationship. Three dangling causes
mark the end of the scene; Kralik’s promise that this Christmas will be
the best in the histoiy of the store, Pepi's success in eliciting a promo¬
tion from Mr. Matuschek, and Mr. Matuschek's instructions to Kralik
to fire Vadas quietly.
The last of these is picked up first, when Kralik, happily returning to
the shop and receiving congratulations from everyone^ quickly assigns
Vadas a time-consuming and pointless task. This scene is imbued with
dramatic irony—as Kralik toys with Vadas, the latter is unaware of the
fact that Kralik knows about his affair, and that he's soon to be termi¬
nated.
The next dangling cause is picked up when Pepi emerges from a hab¬
erdashery, done up in expensive-looking new clothes and a hat—visual
evidence of his transformation in status. He delivers the news about Va-
das's affair and Matuschek's attempted suicide through indirection— ^
letting the others listen in on his phone calls.
After this, Kralik finally finds an excuse to fire Vadas (his criticism of
Klara). In the ensuing scuffle, Vadas is knocked into the display of ciga¬
rette boxes—yet another payoff of that motif.
>
Sequence G; The Pursuit of Klara Begins
The remaining two sequences return the focus to the main plot, cen- ,
tered on KralikT pursuit of Klara. This refocusing of attention also
marks the transition from second act to third. As noted previously, the
main tension was premised on symmetry—neither Kralik nor Klara
knew the truth, and the hopes and fears of the audience were bound >
up in the question of whether the misunderstanding would doom their
relationship. Now, with the fracturing of the symmetry yielding light on
the situation for Kralik but not Klara, a new question has replaced the
old: will Kralik succeed in wooing Klara despite the misunderstanding? '
The character-with-objective pattern of the third act imbues it with dra¬
matic tension, but dramatic irony remains a significant element of audi¬
ence involvement right through to the end of the picture.
The sequence begins with Klara reaching forlornly into an empty
post office box, then returning to work, only to discover Kralilc has be- ^
come the manager—a development that causes her to faint. Klara winds
7/ie Shop Around the Corner: Fractured Symmetry
up in bed, and Kralik visits and begins to woo her—using, appropriately
enough, indirection, Rather than reveal immediately and directly who
he is—the ''dear friend^’ of their correspondence—he chooses instead
to seduce her by writing a letter to her and pretending he is not the one
who wrote it, said letter being very complimentary to him (describing
him as a 'Very attractive young man’'). The scene has no dramatic con¬
flict and is sustained instead with the dramatic and comic irony (Klara
tells him it's "difficult to explain a man like him to a man like you").
KralikV approach amounts to a distant echo of the sales technique Klara
used on him twice before—while trying to get a job during their first
meeting, and later when she tried to manipulate him into giving her the
night off.
The effect of the letter is intoxicating on Klara—she promises Kralik
she'll be back the next day and will sell more goods than ever before—a
dangling cause picked up later in this sequence and the next. Motifs
come into play in the scene—the word "psychological" is planted here,
the cigarette box is paid off yet again—this time with Klara announcing
her intention to get her "dear friend" one for Christmas (much to Kral-
ikV dismay), and the motif of the wallet bearing family pictures is
planted.
The film now switches to daytime in front of the shop, where Pepi
berates Rudy—the new errand boy—about being on time, in the proc¬
ess disclosing to the audience the fact that it’s Christmas Day. Inside the
shop, Kralik announces that Mr. Matuschek is much better—an update
of his condition that serves to disarm confusion that might arise in the
final sequence, when Matuschek shows up at the shop.
The twelve-minute sequence ends with a scene that picks up on the
dangling cause of Klara’s intention to huy the cigarette box for her
"dear friend." Pirovitch persuades her to buy a wallet for her friend in¬
stead, using—as usual—indirection: he starts by telling her he wants to
get a perfectly awful present for a relative he dislikes, and he thought
the cigarette box would be perfrt^t. After the scene, Pirovitch informs
Kralik that he’s succeeded^ a surprise twist revealing the two had been
in cahoots on the issue.
Sequence The Best Christmas Since '28
The final sequence of the film, like the first, is unified by place and time,
in this case the shop on Christmas Eve. It begins with Mr. Matuschek
60
61
SCRgENWRITING
arriving outside his store in the bustle of Christmas Eve. Here, in yet
another example of verbal indirection, he attempts to sell a suitcase to
two women by pretending to be just another window shopper,
After this blows up in his face, Mr. Matuschek enters the shop and
congratulates everyone on the best Christmas saJes since 1928, The fob
lowing scenes—involving the handouts of bonuses (a payoff of a motif
from Sequence B) and Mr. MatuscheMs attempts to get himself a date
on Christmas Eve (paying off the motif planted by Vadas)—amount to
an epilogue: the script revisits all the various characters, with references
to issues developed during the story (Kralik having other plans, Piro-
vitch staying home with his family, Pepi going off on a date, and finally
Rudy, the new errand boy, with no place to go). This unusual placement
of the epilogue before the resolution of the story is a bow to the fact
that the remaining tension is largely ironic: what will happen when
Klara finds out the truth? The resolution of that tension does not deliver
the emotional impact of a more dramatically driven piece (such as Toy
Story)^ so the need for an epilogue to bring the audience down from
that emotional high is not as great. By placing the epilogue before the
resolution, the remaining tension imbues an epilogue that otherwise
might not have the emotional power to sustain audience interest.
With only Kralik and Klara remaining in the shop, all that remaans
on the agenda is the moment of recognition for Klara: how will she react
when she finds out the truth? Will she still love the "dear friend” when
she finds out who it is? Here, the screenwriter exploits the situation for
maximum effect, delaying the moment of recognition—milking the
comic and dramatic irony of the situation—through a full ten minutes
before finally delivering the goods.
First Kralik sees Klara vvnappmg the wallet for her "dear friend,”
closing off that dangling cause. Klara tells him she thinks she might have
an engagement ring when she returns to the shop, and Kralik replies
that he s meeting someone that night, and it^s serious; Klara suggests
they may both be engaged come Monday—a dangling cause delivered
in full comically ironic fashion. During the conversation, Kralik gets
some timely exposition about her initial attraction to him, in which the
psychologically mixed up” motif is paid off twice.
After learning this, Kralik uses verbal indirection to finally land her,
creating an elaborate story about how heM already met Klara^s lover, a
Mr. Popkin, and proceeding to torment her with less-than-flattering de¬
tails about him. He proves to be the ultimate salesman, drawing such a
dreary picture of her anonymous lover so that when he finally reveals
The Shop Around the Comer: Fractured Symmetry
the truth of the situation to her, he is a much better catch by compar¬
ison.
Once this last thread of ironic tension is resolved, there remains only
a brief gag about Kralik's bowleggedness, a payoff of the motif planted
at the cafe, before a loving embrace ends the picture.
Sequences in the original screenplay: a comparison
As was standard practice in 1940, Samson Raphaelson’s original screen¬
play was marked by sequence. There are six in alJ, labeled A-F, and vary
in length of running time from six to twenty-three minutes. Sequence
A encompasses both of what T identify as the first two sequences—the
ensemble setup and KlaraT quest for a job. It's logical to group these
together in the sense that, together, they constitute the bulk of the setup
for the film as a whole. As detailed above, though, Klara's arrival signals
a significant shift in the action; in fact, with the exception of a one-and-
a-half minute scene between Kralik and Matuschek, Klara is onscreen
continuously from the moment she enters to the moment she succeeds
in selling the cigarette box, and her objective—getting a job—touches
on all the action, including the brief scene between Kralik and Matu¬
schek. From a writer’s point of view, it's more useful to see them as two
distinct sequences to be tackled in succession, rather than one large
chunk of story.
The screenplay’s Sequence B and my own Sequence C (Kralik and
Klara trying to get the night off) are in accord; the screenplay's Se¬
quence C combines both of my Sequences D and E. The logic of the
screenplay’s grouping appears elusive at first; of those Uventy-four min¬
utes of screen time, fourteen take place at the shop and involve the "B”
plot—Matuschek fires Kralik, finds out Vadas is the guilty party, and
attempts suicide. The next nine move to anew location—the cafe—and
return to the "A" plot—Kralik finditig out Klara is the "dear friend.”
Their unity seems to be thematic—both depict a man discovering
something about the vroman he loves. However, from a writer's view¬
point, tackling these two portions of the story separately makes the job
easier.
The screenplay’s Sequences D and E are largely similar to my own
divisions (Sequences F and G); on the final sequence, my analysis and
the screenplay s demarcation are in agreement.
62
SCREENWRIT^NG
THE SHOP AROUND THE CORNER
Sequence Breakdown
Running
5eq. Description Length Time
ACT I
(Script Sequence A)
A Opening of film (excluding titles^ which run 1:17) to 8:39 8:39
Matuschek telling the Miklos Brothers on the phone (9%)
that he doesn’t want tlie cigarette boxes. Unifying
Aspect. Place and time. Protagonist: Ensemble.
Point of attack: Klara entrance,
B Klara enters and tries to get a job^ she finally succeeds 8:50 17:29
by selling the cigarette box to the female customer. (18%)
Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagomst Klara.
Objective: A job.
(Script Sequence B)
ACT II
(Main tension: Will Kralik and Klara get together despite the
misunderstanding?)
C Kralik and Klara argue about the polka-dotted dress; 16:19 33:48
Kralik reveals to Pirovitch he’s going to ask Mr, (35%)
Matuschek for a raise and then meet his pen pal.
Predicament: Kralik has unwittingly fallen in love
with a woman he hates (23:45-—25%)
Matuschek talks on phone to his wifcj who is asking for
yet more money; Kralik is rebuffed by Matuschek—and
his offer to make a delivery to Mrs. Matuschek is
refused. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist:
Kralik. Objective: The night off.
(Script Sequence C)
D Matuschek fires Kralik, sends everyone else home, 13:52 47:40
discovers true identity of the man his wife is (49%)
seeing—and attempts suicide. Unifying Aspect
Dramatic Tension, Protagonist. Matuschek. Objective:
To find out who is sleeping with his wife.
£ Pirovitch and Kralik venture to restaurant; Kralik 8:51 56:31
discovers it's Klara; Kralik goes to talk to her. She (58%)
rebuffs him, calling him an ‘insignificant clerk.”
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Kralik.
Objective: To keep hope for love with Klara alive.
first Culmination: Klara calls Kralik an “msignificant
clerk>” Kralik exits the cafe (56:22—58%).
The Sftop Around the Comer: Fractured Symmetry
63
(Script Sequence D)
F Kralik is re-hired by a bedridden Matuschek, fires 10:42 1:07:13
Vadas. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. (70%)
Kralik. Ohjecihe: to take the reins at Matuschek 8c Co.
ACT III
G The film returns to the main plot, and refocuses onto 11:50 1:19:03
KraliMs quest for Klara, which initiates the third act (82%)
tension. Kralik will try to use his newly won power and
position to rescue their relationship. In this sequence,
Klara reaches into empty mailbox, then faints upon
seeing that Kralik is indeed the new boss; Kralik visits
her in bed—then, with the help of Pirovitch, gets her to
give him a wallet.
(Script Sequence E)
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension, Protagonist: Kralik.
Objective: Klara.
Second Culmination: Kralik visits a bedridden Klara
(1:09:30—72%).
(Script Sequence F)
H Matuschek arrives outside store on Christmas Eve, then 17:47 1:36:50
goes inside, congratulates everyone, hands out bonuses, (100%)
gets himself a date, Alone with Klara, Kralik seduces her
away from her fictitious lover, tlien finally reveals the
truth about himself and the letters. Unifying Aspect.
Place. Protagonist. Ensemble
Epilogue: Matuschek congratulates them on a fine job,
gives out bonuses, gets himself a date.
Resolution: Klara embraces Kralik,
Double Indemnity: Flashback to the Future
65
4
Double Indemnity: Flashback
to the Future
Released in 1944 as a much-anticipated cinematic adaptation of a
James M. Cain novel considered too risque for the screen, Double In¬
demnity wound up winning several Academy Awards, among them Best
Screenplay, It is noteworthy as a collaboration between Billy Wilder (di¬
rector) and Raymond Chandler (detective novelist who wrote the
script) that generated the classic film noir.
Because it uses the principle of flashback, Double Indemnity tests the
basic theory of dramatic tension—that audience attention is achieved
by creating in them hope and fear about the outcome of a question: will
a character get his or her objective? In this picture, the protagonist, Wal¬
ter Neff, tells the audience at the outset the outcome of his quest, yet
the movie remains intensely involving. This is because while the audi¬
ence knows the ultimate outcome, it is unaware of when it occurs and
under what circumstances. Thus, as the scenes unfold, the sTorytelleis
can still manipulate the audience’s hopes and fears, though the question
posed to the audience differs slightly from when the audience does not
know the outcome, That is, whenever Neff runs iuto an obstacle,
question becomes not so much “will he overcome this obstacle?” as
“will this be the obstacle that proves his undoing?” The hope remains
the same; that he’ll overcome the obstacle. And the fear that he won’t
is. if anything, enhanced by the audience’s awareness that Neff is ulti-
rnately doomed.
— 64 —
Sequence A; Doing Ninety in the Parlor
The first sequence runs fourteen minutes and is unified by dramatic
tension: Neff is the protagonist and his objective^ contained in a single
scenCj is to sell insurance to Phyllis. The first six minutes of the sequence
set up Neff’s circumstances that render the scene with Phyllis compre¬
hensible.
The opening of the picture begins with a puzzle, aimed, as is typical
in a successful picture, at arousing curiosity. The title sequence itself
features a silhouetted hgure on crutches moving ominously toward the
audience while grand, intense music announces the dark, dangerous^
suspenseful nature of the subject matter. The riddle of the man on
crutches is not answered, but is Instead supplanted by another puzzle: a
car driving recklessly late at night on rain-slicked streets. Who’s driving
it? Why? What’s wrong? Is someone after him?
Even when the car skids to a stop and the door opens, we are not
allowed a glimpse of the face of the person who emerges, so even that
mystery is milked for a minute or so longer. In the elevator shortly
thereafter, the answers to the puzzle come at last: the man’s name is
Neff, he works in the insurance business, and he’s not much interested
in small talk at that lime.
More substantial answers to the mystery do not come until Neff be¬
gins dictating a memo to his friend Keyes, almost five nninutes into the
film, Even here, though, the answers are given as pieces of a tantalizing
puzzle, with important parts left out. Neff mentions the Dietrichson
case, the fact that it was murder, and confesses his guilt in it. In this
confession, he describes himself using the terminology of the insurance
business: age, height, occupation, health, even though he is addressing
a friend who would know these things. This use of irony in the dia¬
logue—Neff pretending that his friend doesn’t already know these
facts—serves both the function of adding extra richness to a painful
confession, while simultaneously giving exposition to the audience—
facts about the protagonist are thus smuggled in without the audience
tealizing it. After confessing his guilt, Neff begins to relate the tale, send-
the narrative into the past, where the story proper begins—six min¬
utes into the sequence. ^ ■
Neff’s introductory monologue runs just over hvo minutes, and even
though it amounts to a monologue, it still has within it a subtext an
action verb, something Neff is trying to do aside from relating informa¬
tion. The memo is presented as a polemic—an argument with Keyes, In
66
67
SCREENWRITING
which Neff will show how Keyes has an over-inflated opinion of him¬
self, thinking himself ^kuch a wolf on a phony claim." When Neff be¬
gins relating the story, “It began last May . . he is doing more than
regaling an old friend with an interesting tale; he's setting out to show
how Keyes was wrong. This dangling cause is finally closed off in the
last minutes of the film, when Keyes acknowledges, “You can't figure
them aJl, Walter.”
In the flashback, Neff arrives at Phyhis s house to sell her husband
on insurance. The scene plays out in simple dramatic fashion, with Neff
playing the protagonist whose objective is to sell Phyllis a policy, and
the chief obstacle is his sexual interest in Phyllis. When Phyllis responds
to Neffs flirtation with an accusation that he is exceeding the speed
limit, there follows a famous example of verbal indirection: a discussion
about a traffic stop on the surface conceals sexual sparring just beneath
it. In this scene, the anklet is planted, as well as the notion of accident
insurance; in fact, Phyllis’s queiy about accident insurance, and Neffs
subsequent ruminations about it, constitute the point of attack of the
picture, Neffs initial confession also serves the role of the point of at¬
tack, focusing the audience attention on the future and giving us a very
strong sense of what the story will be about. The scene ends with an
appointment: Neff will return Thursday night at 8:00 p.m. to talk to her
husband about the auto-insurance renewal.
Neff returns to his office, where he witnesses Keyes interrogating a
truck driver named Garlopis who has submitted a false claim. Here,
Keyes's great talent for smoldng out phony claims is dramatized, the
dialogue motif of the “little man” inside of him is planted, as is the
visual motif of the cigarette-lighting routine.
The sequence ends when Neff arrives in his own office and finds a
message from Phyllis, rescheduling the appointment. In voice-over,
Neff indicates his intention to go, a dialogue hook that binds the first
sequence to the second.
Sequence B; The Red-hot Poker
The next sixteen minutes of the film introduce and develop a line of
tension quite distinct from that of the first fourteen minutes, which is
why what is marked as Sequence A in the screenplay can be split into
two at this juncture. Whereas the first fourteen minutes hooked the au¬
dience with curiosity and found Neff trying to sell insurance, the next
D ouble Indemnity: Flashback to the Future
sixteen follow Neff’s resistance to temptation to cooperate with Phyllis
in a murderous plot, resistance that ultimately proves futile.
The sequence begins with Neff keeping an appointment established
in the previous scene. Though ostensibly there to sell auto insurance, it
becomes quickly apparent to him that Phyllis has something else on her
mind, which he readily misinterprets as sexual interest in him. His ob¬
jective in the scene is a sexual liaison with her, and the chief obstacles
to that objective are her persistent questions about insurance. In the
end, when Neff realizes what precisely she is asking for—an accident
policy on her husband which would enable her to murder him and col¬
lect a large sum of money—he abandons his sexual objective and re¬
treats.
The dramatic tension of the sequence is thus set up four minutes
into it: Neff must resist Phyllis and her devious plan. He does this at
first by food, drink, and bowling, then, when Phyllis arrives at his apart¬
ment, by stridently pointing out ail the things that could go wrong with
such a scheme. As Neff describes how Keyes would react if she were to
file a claim after murdering her husband, he is doing more than fighting
off temptation and trying to talk Phyllis out of it; he is also smuggling
exposition to the audience {explaining all the obstacles that await them)
and setting up a reversal (see text box on reversals, page 168).
The reversal is crucial because of the implausibility of the premise.
What would drive a relatively normal, law-abiding citizen who has
never done an'jhhing more ethically questionable than sell vacuum
cleaners to agree to kill a perfect stranger for the sake of money he
doesn't need and a woman he's just met? The storytellers had several
options at their disposal they couldNe made Neff desperate for money
for some reason, or given him a history of criminal activity, or given
him some personally acrimonious relationship with Mr. Dietrichson.
Instead, they left the character and situation essentially as presented in
the Cain novel, and opted for a reversal, in which the protagonist resists
the temptation fiill-bore, givingxhe aadience a glimpse of an alternate
outcome (he successfully resists), then succumbs. (Note; while present
in the Cain novel, the reversal is less developed). A cutaway to the pres¬
ent day, mth Neff continuing his memo to Keyes, provides the audience
with additional justification; Neff had long been tempted to try to
“crook the house " because he knew the industry ffom the inside.
W^hen Neff finally tells Phyllis he’ll help her do the murder, the dra¬
matic tension in the sequence is resolved in the negative. In the three-
minute epilogue of the sequence, Neff launches into a series of dangling
68
SCREENWRITING
Double Indemnity: Flashback to the Future
69
causes, hooking the sequence with those that follow: they're going to get
away with it because he knows how to do it right; everything will be
perfect—nothing overlooked, nothing weak—he and Phyllis must never
be seen together, they must watch every move carefully, “it's straight
down the line/'
When Neff watches Phyllis’s car drive off in the rain-—a classic exam¬
ple of both visual indirection (we hear the car but see only Neffs face
as he watches it) and aftermath (the scene is light on dialogue and heavy
on atmosphere; see text box, page 54), both the sequence and first act
draw to a close. As in Toy Story, there is something of a curtain behveen
the acts—in this case, a cutaway to Neff in the present, speaking into
the Dictaphone and explaining the next phase of their scheme.
Sequence C: Setting Up the Murder
At the outset of the second act, the main tension is clear: will Neff get
the girl and the money? This sounds like two objectives but since they're
entwined, they function as one. The answer to this question was of
course given explicitly by Neff in the opening Dictaphone scene. Wliat
drew the audience into the story at that time was curiosity—not
whether he'll obtain his objective, but rather, how did he fail? By this
point in the movie, dramatic and ironic tension are both used to engage
the audience's emotional involvement—irony created by our fore¬
knowledge of the outcome, which creates a sense of anticipation—and
dramatic tension as well, since, as discussed previously, the audience
doesn't loiow which obstacle Neff encounters will be the one that dooms
him, so the issues of hope and fear central to dramatic tension remain
in play.
The fourteen minutes of Sequence C are concerned with Neff and
Phyllis setting up the murder, and involve two reversals, the second of
which spins into Sequence D and the murder itself. The opening scene
is set up in the voice-over narration—Neff has to get DietrichsonT sig¬
nature without Dietrichson's knowing about it, and with some witness
present. The rest of the scene proceeds with dramatic irony as the pri¬
mary means of audience engagement: there is little conflict in the scene,
just Neff trying to sell Dietrichson on an accident policy, Dietrichson
refusing, and Neff getting him to sign twice. The emotional power in
the scene comes from the audience’s superior knowledge—and fear that
Dietrichson will find out what it is he's really signing. One bit of infor-
Figure 5. 'Walter Neff watches Phyllis drive away in a brief aftermath scene
in Double Indemn/ty [1944-), a medium shot that ends Sequence B (and
first act) of the picture. Like Toy Sto/y and The Graduate, this film features
a “curtain” after the first act—in this case, a cutaway to Neff narrating
into a Dictaphone at his office, where he sets up the dramatic tension of
Sequence C. In both Toy Story and The Graduate, a musical interiude
serves as a curtain. (Frame enlargement)
mation revealed by Dietrichson becomes important immediately after¬
ward; his anticipated trip to Palo Alto. After succeeding in getting
Dietrichson's signature^ Neff explains to Phyllis the “double indemnity"
clause, and tells her that Dietrichson must take the train—a forceful
dangling cause.
When Neff leaves the house^ he .encounters the first potential obsta¬
cle: Dietrichson's daughter Lola is in his car, in need of a ride, Neff
maintains his cool, and in the process the Lola-Nino subplot is estab¬
lished. The dramatic irony of the scene—audience knowledge that Neff
is actually planning to kill Lola'^ father—infuses it with emotion, so that
the expository function (giving tlie audience information about Lola's
circumstances and romantic aspirations with Nino] is concealed.
The first reversal of the sequence conies in the following scene at the
Los Feliz market, where Neff explains to Phyllis how^ everything is falling
A
70
SCREENWRITING
Double fndemnity: Flashback to the Future
71
into place^ only to have her deliver the unfortunate news that Dietrich-
son has broken his leg, and the trip to Palo Alto has been cancelled.
Phyllis wants to go ahead with the plan in some form, but Neff warns
her against it, a dangling cause closed off at the end of the sequence.
The following scene, featuring Keyes trying to talk Neff into taking a
desk job, utilizes preparation by contrast in order to set up another re¬
versal. In Neffs voice-over narration, he speaks of the fates watching
over him to prevent him from doing something he shouldn't do, and in
the scene with Keyes he is generally upbeat. This moment is really the
first glimpse of a potential outcome of the 61m—Neff doesn't go
through with it. When Phyllis calls with the news that Dietrichson is
going to Palo Alto after all—and on the train, as they'd planned—^the
reversal is effected. The scene, which had previously been driven by dra¬
matic tension—Keyes trying to persuade Neff to take a desk job—now
switches to ironic tension, with Keyes hovering in the background while
Neff and Phyllis speak surreptitiously on the phone. When Neff lights
Keyes's cigar at the end of the scene, the sequence also comes to an end,
with the plan having overcome its one signihcant obstacle.
Sequence D: Dietrichson Makes a Wrong Turn
This thirteen-minute sequence is in essence a short 61m about ttvo peO’
pie committing a murder, and it ends when the murder is complete. Its
engine is overwhelmingly dramatic—will Neff and PhyUis pull off their
murder? Still, two layers of irony suffuse it—the overriding layer of the
audience's foreknowledge that the two will ultimately fail, and the inter¬
mittent layer that occurs whenever the two are in contact with other
characters, who don't know about their conspiracy.
Neff’s voice-over narration at the outset provides the sequence's
‘Arst act” setup, and also a good deal of preparation. He recounts how
he set up his alibi and arranged the doorbell and phone so that he'd
know if he had visitors or callers. These steps help enhance the anticipa¬
tion of the actual murder, which has been planned for some time.
When Neff gets into the back of Dietrichson’s car three minutes into
the sequence, the setup is complete and the sequence's "'second act” be¬
gins. After some ironic dialogue between Dietrichson and Phyllis, in
which he assures her he'll be back in a few days, Neff kills him. When
they arrive at the train station, Neff and Phyllis exchange words in a
recapitulation scene, in which Neff lays out a series of dangling causes
to be picked up as the conspiracy unfolds. Once on the train, Neff hobbles
to the observation car at die rear (paying off the motif of the silhouetted
man on crutches from the title sequence) and is about to leap onto the
tracks when the character Jackson interferes. Dramatic irony infuses this
scene, forcing Neff to be discreet as he attempts to get Jackson off the
platform. When he succeeds, NeJf leaps from the train and he and Phyl¬
lis complete their "'impersonation ” A last-minute problem with their
car's engine threatens to be their undoing until Neff is able to start it.
The sequence concludes when Neff drops off Phyllis, then heads
home, and we revisit the preparations he made for the night of the mur¬
der. Neffs voice-over narration ends with a chilling dangling cause: he
expresses fear that everything will go wrong, that he Is walking the walk
of a dead man.
Sequence E: Apparent Triumph
The hfth sequence, which runs just under fourteen minutes, is unihed
by Neffs desire to weather the stormy aftermath of the murder without
giving himself away, and is comprised of two important reversals set up
by preparation by contrast, both of which are notably absent h'ora the
James M. Cain book. How these moments of the story are handled is a
good example of the virtuosity of the Wilder-Chandler collaboration,
During the hrsthve minutes of the sequence, much attention is given
to creating a sense of impending doom^ picking up on the dangling
cause of the previous sequence. This is accomplished by withholding
important information from the audience as long as possible, then de¬
livering it for maximum effect.
The sequence commences with Neff narrating in his ofhce and de¬
scribing his fears of exposure. The scene flashes back to his offlce build¬
ing, where Neff runs immediately into Keyes, who says something is
wrong with the Dietrichson case, and who leads Neff to a meeting rvith
their boss, Norton. The scene is infused with dramatic irony—audience
fear that the secret will come out and Neff will be exposed.
In the meeting mth their boss, Norton announces he is not satished
with the conclusion of accident^] death in the Dietrichson case—but he
does not say why. The meeting is inteirupted by the arrival of a visi¬
tor—a new development that delays NortonN delivery of his objections
to the case. This is a classic example of retardation (see text box, page
24)—the audience is made to fear Norton’s conclusion, but is also made
72
SCREENWRITING
Double Indemnity: Flashback to the Future
73
Figure 6. Neff’s best friend, 8arton Keyes, makes an unexpected and un¬
welcome appearance at Neff’s door while Phyllis is en route in Sequence
E of Double Indemnity {19A-4). The scene is driven by dramatic irony, and
delivers a devastating blow to Neff’s hopes for his scheme's success,
Careful use of preparation—complete with Neff declaring that he feels the
money is as good as in the bank—is paid off by contrast when Keyes ar¬
rives and expresses his suspicions, Neff's upbeat mood before this scene
provides the first culmination of the picture—a reasonabie glimpse of a
possible outcome, namely that he and Phyllis succeed. (Frame enlarge¬
ment)
I
to wait before hearing what it is. The suspense is thus milked for maxi-
mum effect.
Just before Phyllis enters, Norton urges Neff and JCeyes to 'Svatch me
handle this'’—a dangling cause enhancing our anticipation. When Phyl¬
lis arrives, Norton makes introductions and then begins to make his
case against her. At last, Norton announces his conclusion that it was a
suicide—an innocuous conclusion as far as the hopes and fears of Neff
and Phyllis (and the audience) are concerned. This moment of relief is
punctuated by some business involving the glass of drinking water that
Neff hands to Phyllis, which allows the two to maJ^e surreptitious eye
contact. Norton's identification of suicide as the problem with the Die-
trichson case is a reversal, set up mthe previous four minutes by sugges¬
tions of impending doom—classic preparation by contrast.
Soon after this, Phyllis launches into a diatribe, denouncing Norton
and storming out of the office, earning Norton a rebuke from Keyes:
You sure handled that one —closing off the dangling cause from just
before Phyllis’s arrival. Keyes completes the demolition of NortonT case
in a memorable lecture about suicide.
The scene with Norton is worth study because it shows two forces
simultaneously at work—dramatic and ironic tension. The scene’s emo¬
tional center is ironic—fear that Neffs secret will be revealed. But the
scene is shaped by dramatic tension—Norton's desire to prove he's 'no
idiot. The first act or setup for that tension occurs when Norton tells
Keyes and Neff to watch him ''handle thisf an explicit attempt to show
that Just because a man has a large office he's 'no idiot.” When Phyllis
exits, the tension is resolved to the negative (i.e., he fails). Keyes's subse¬
quent destruction of Norton’s case proves to be the ''third act” of the
scene, with the business with the glass of water and Keyes’s line about
wearing a tuxedo providing the exclamation point at the end of it.
After leaving Norton s office, preparation by contrast begins again in
earnest—this time in the reverse of the previous eight minutes. Neffs
voice-over narration, the lighting, and the music all suggest a positive
outcome to the murder conspiracy. When Neff arrives home, Phyllis
calls him and the two exchange congratulations, and Neff invites her
over; the money, says Neff, is as good as in the bank. These moments
amount to the first culmination of the film—the midpoint moment
when the moxhe could reasonably end, with Neff and Phyllis living hap¬
pily ever after with $100,000 and no one the ^viser about their murder
conspiracy—the mirror opposite of its actual resolution.
Soon after Neff invites Phyllis over, this glimpse of a positive out¬
come vanishes in the wake of another reversal: Keyes arrives with suspi¬
cions about the Dietrichson case, and, unknown to him (but quite
known to the audience) Phyllis oil the way, The scene proceeds with the
two tools of dramatic and ironic tension, dramatic in that Neff attempts
get Keyes out of the apartment before Phyllis arrives, and ironic in
primary emotional aspect: fear that Phyllis wll arrive with Keyes still
there, and the conspiracy will be exposed. Neff’s casual appointment
’'^th Phyllis has turned into the classic deadline.
Phyllis arrives before Keyes leaves, but happens to overhear him be-
ore she s discovered. Keyes's dialogue continues ironicalLy in earnest,
74
SCREENWRITINO
expressing suspicion about Phyllis while Phyllis secretly listens to him.
Keyes enters the elevator after delivering an ominous dangling cause
about arresting her "'so fast it will make her head spin/’
The sequence concludes with Neff recounting the new danger—
Keyes will never give up on the case; he'll have her investigated and fol¬
lowed, so they canT see each other for awhile, Phyllis objects to the idea
that they must be apart, and he reassures her with an embrace and a
kiss. This slightly positive note provides a striking contrast to the shot
that opens the following sequence: Lola waiting for Neff outside his of¬
fice.
Sequence F: The Conspiracy Crumbles
The fourteen minutes of Sequence F proceeds as a series of increasingly
threatening revelations and crises^ and its protagonist, Neff, has as his
objective the need to diffuse and disarm them. Along the way, attempts
are made by the storytellers to use the momentary elevation of hope to
set off further calamity by contrast.
At his office, Neff hears Lola deliver some disturbing news about
Phyllis's past: it seems that her murder conspiracy with Neff may not
have been her first The scene is infused with irony: our knowledge, un¬
known to Lola, that she is confessing her suspicions of foul play in her
father's death to the man who engaged in that foul play.
Neff disarms this potential disaster by treating Lola to dinner and
taking her to the beach. The mood again becomes upbeat—Neff noting
that by the second day Lola was able to laugh—just in time for the next
bit of disturbing news: Neff seeing Jackson, the last man who saw him
on the train platform, sitting outside Keyes’s office.
Ironic tension is milked to maximal effect in the scenes with Keyes
and Jackson. First, Keyes announces he is a great man, having unraveled
the Dietrichson murder conspiracy. He articulates the conspiracy with
devastating accuracy—to the man who was involved in that conspiracy.
Neff makes a feeble attempt to undermine Keyes's theory, then Jackson
is brought in, and here suspense is created out of the fear that the wit¬
ness will recognize Neff as the man on the platform.
Neff manages to diffuse the situation by trying to avoid direct eye
contact with Jackson, whose examination of Dietrichson’s photograph
confirms Keyes's theory about the murder. After Jackson leaves, Keyes
works on the audience's expectation with several dangling causes: mur¬
Doubie indemnity: Flashback to the Future
75
der conspiracies always fall apart sooner or later; when two people are
involved it's usually sooner; Phyllis^ lover and co-conspirator will show
himself eventually; if Phyllis tries to sue over a denied claim, he’ll be
waiting. He also plants the dialogue motif about the trolley car.
Afterward, Neff contacts Phyllis urgently for a meeting at the market.
Here, he tells her they can't go ahead with their plan to collect the insur¬
ance money, and she rejects his assertion. As Phyllis goes away vowing
to make the claim (a dangling cause picked up in the following se¬
quence), Neff remarks in his voice-over narration that it was the first
time he’d pictured her dead. The moment marks the second culmina¬
tion—the end of the second act—the resolution of the main tension.
The answer to the dramatic question: ‘Vill Neff get the girl and the
money?” is answered to the negative. The third act turns on a very dif¬
ferent question: “Will Neff extricate himself from the conspiracy?”
Sequence G: The Case Busts Wide Open
The thirteen and a half minutes of the seventh sequence concern Neff’s
realization that murdering Phyllis will allow him to extricate himself
from his troubles, and his carrying out the murder.
The plan is germinated in a scene with Lola at the Hollywood Bowl,
where Neff learns that Lola believes Phyllis and Nino Sachetti are the
two who murdered her father, The involvement of Sachetti is confirmed
in the following scene when Keyes reveals to Neff that the 'somebody
else”—the person who helped Phyllis kill Dietrichson—has revealed
himself. This leads Neff to sneak into Keyes's office to find out what
Keyes is talking about, and here he discovers that Keyes suspects that
Sachetti is Phyllis' co-conspirator.
Neff calls Phyllis and makes an appointment with her: eleven o'clock
that night, with the front door unlocked and the lights out. In voice¬
over, Neff reveals his intention to kill Phyllis in order to gets himself
out of the mess he is in, a moment that marks the end of the 'sequence
first act.”
Soon thereafter, Phyllis is revealed to be hiding a gun under her chair
prior to Neffs arrival, setting up two lines of ironic tension: each in¬
tends to kill the other; neither is aware of the other's intention. In the
Scene, Neff toys with Phyllis for a few- moments, explaining the rationale
for his actions. The secret^ murderous intentions of both characters in-
fi^se the scene with emotion. Neff prepares to kill Phyjlis, only to be shot
76
77
SCREENWRITING
first. The two embrace, and Phyllis confesses a change in her rotten
heart to him, which serves as a brief preparation by contrast to NefTs
killing her a moment later.
The sequence ends with Neff greeting Sachetti outside the house and
urging him to call Lola to make up to her, effectively closing off the
Lola-Sachetti subplot.
Sequence H: “Somebody moved the elevators a couple
miles away.”
The death of Phyllis marks the resolution of the picture, and the final
sequence is essentially an epilogue, tying up the relationship between
Neff and Keyes. As in the opening scenes, the final sequence takes place
entirely in the “present,” with Neff completing his narration into the
microphone and Keyes arriving on the scene. The sequence has a simple
dramatic thrust—Neff’s objective, revealed two minutes into the se¬
quence, is to make it across the border. Keyes responds to this intention
with a dangling cause: “you’ll never even make the elevator,” a predic¬
tion that comes true a minute or so later.
The sequence and him end with a punctuation mark: the payoffs of
two motifs—Neff telling Keyes “f love you, too,” and Keyes lighting
Neffs cigarette.
Sequences in the original screenplay: a comparison
This screenplay, like that of The Shop Around the Comefy is explicitly
marked by sequences, this time four in allf three of them with running
times of about thirty minutes and one running about half that. Closer
examination again shows tliat within all the sequences except one (Se¬
quence C) there are significant subdivisions in the development and re¬
lease of dramatic tension.
Sequence A in the screenplay, like that of The Shop Around the Cor-
nety encompasses the entire first act. As detailed above and in the ac¬
companying chart, it clearly has a significant shift midway through.
Until Phyllis calls Neff back to her place and discusses accident insur-
*There was also a Sequence E—a portrayal of Neff’s execution—which was
filmed but not included in the final cut.
Double fndemnity: Flashback to the Future
ance with him, she’s just another customer (albeit one he lusts after)
and he just another salesman in the middle of an ordinary day. After
that point, his focus centers obsessively on Phyllis and her proposal.
Sequence B in the screenplay corresponds to Sequences C and D in
my own analysis. These twenty-nine minutes of screen time encompass
both the planning of the murder and the murder itself, two very distinct
segments of the story, separated by that glimpse of an alternative out¬
come—the “fates” that Neff thought might be watching over him when
the initial plan is shelved hy Dietrichson’s broken kg.
Sequence C in the script corresponds precisely with my own demar¬
cation of Sequence E, while Sequence D stretches across what I consider
three distinct shifts in the story: Neffk effort to control the collapsing
conspiracy, his murder of Phyllis, and his attempt at the end to escape
to Mexico. These are all united by Neff’s attempts to undo what he has
done (committed the murder), but they are more easily tackled as sepa¬
rate beats by a writer.
78
SCREENWRITING
ACT I
(Script Sequence A)
A Opening confession to Phyllis leaving a message for Neff 14:22 14:22
(excluding opening titles). Unifying Aspect. Dramatic (14%)
Tension. Protagonist Neff. Objective: To sell Phyllis on a
car insurance policy.
B Neff visits Phyllis’s place a second time—she suggests 15:40 30:02
taking out an accident policy. He resists and tries to (29%)
escape the entanglement; at the end of the sequence> he
is drawn in. Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist Neff. Objective: Resist the temptation posed
by Phyllis.
Point of attack' Phyllis suggests accident insurance
without her husband knowing. Also, Neff’s
confession in the opening monologue serves this
function.
Predicament: Neff decides to help Phyllis murder her
husband and get the insurance money.
(Script Sequence B)
ACT II
(Main tension: Will Neff get the girl and the money?)
C Neff and Phyllis set up the murder, only to find it 14:17 45:20
thwarted by Mr. Dietrichson’s broken leg. Unifying (43%)
Aspect. Dj'amatic Tension. Protagonist: Neff. Objective:
To set up the murder.
D Neff and Phyllis carry out the murder. Unifying Aspect. 12:41 58:01
Dramatic Tension, Protagonist Neff, Objective: To (55%)
murder Dietrichson.
(Script Sequence C)
E Neff tries to survive the murder’s aftermath; his hopes 13:45 1:11:46
are first raised when Keyes inadvertently comes to his (68%)
aid—concluding it was an accident, not suicide, then
dashed, when Keyes becomes suspicious after all.
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Neff.
Objective: To ride out the stormy aftermath without
giving himself away.
First Culmination: Neff thinks he got away with it,
invites Phyllis over (1:06:34—63%).
Doub/e /nc/emnity: Flashback to the Future
79
F Neff finds out about Phyllis’s past role in a murder 13:44 1:24:54
(through Lola); Keyes reveals to him that he’s figured (81%)
out how the murderers did it; Neff then survives a close
call with Jackson from Medford, Oregon, and at last
tells Phyllis it’s over. She refuses. Main Tension is
resolved in the negative: Neff has failed to help Phyllis
pull off the perfect murder—now' she has become the
enemy. Third-act tension: dealing with Phyllis. Unifying
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Neff. Objective:
to weather a succession of crises.
Second Culmination: Neff reabzes he’s not going to
get the girl and he’s not going to get the money.
(Script Sequence D)
ACT ni
G Neff endures revelations about Phyllis and Nino 13:36 1:38:30
Sachetci, concludes that his only hope is to eliminate (93%)
her. He goes to her place and kills her. Unifying Aspect.
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist: Neff. Objective: To solve
his problems by killing Phyllis.
Pesoluiiort: Neff kills Phyllis.
H Neff sends Sachetti back to Lola, then confi'onts Keyes 6:54 1:45:26
in person/tries to make his final getaw^ay, fails. Unifying (100%)
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist: Neff. Objective:
To complete his dictation and escape.
Epilogue: Sequence H,
Fellini’s Nights ofCabiha: Nocturnal Episodes
81
5
\ 'f
Fellini’s Nights of Cabiria:
Nocturnal Episodes
This picture, which won the Oscar for Best Foreign Film in 1957, pro¬
vides a contrast in structure to the others analyzed herein. While by no
means as “esperimentaF' as the films Federico Fellini made a few years
later, it is still a departure from the American style of cinematic story¬
telling. Whereas American films are particularly interested in involving
the audience in a chronological, cause-and-effect story from moment to
moment. Nights of Cabiria is primarily interested in the exploration of
the title character and her circumstances. The course chosen for this
exploration is episodic—the discovery of the character and a series of
tales about her. Still, the film must manage audience attention, and how
it does so, and how it has come to move audiences for many years, is a
subject worth studying, and pays dividends for the screenwriter who
wants to avail himself or herself of all the tools in the arsenal of cinema.
Nights of Cabiria has eight sequences, but unlike the other movies
analyzed herein, half are connected logically and thematically, rather
than causally. As a result, tools such as dangling causes and telegraphing
are used less. Anticipation is created within the sequences using the
tools of dramatic and ironic tension. Still, an overall main tension is
present, and as a result so too is the dramatic three-act structure. Within
the first quarter of the movie, we discover Cabiria’s desire: she wants
love and respectability. Three quarters of the way through the movie,
she gets it in the marriage to Donofrio, resolving this main tension. The
third act, of course, reveals the falsity of Donofrio’s love, resulting in a
devastating finale.
Unlike typical American films, though, there is no true resolution.
The story is open-ended; Cabiria’s problems exist before the movie be¬
gins, and they continue after the movie is finished. As in The Shop
Around the Corner, the transition from Act I to Act II is invisible to the
characters: it occurs because the audience becomes aware of Cabiria’s
situation, not because some specific event happens to her and forces her
to act. When Donofrio reveals his true stripes in the end, Cabiria is in
essentially the same situation as she was in at the beginning of the pic¬
ture—still yearning for love and respectability—only she^s worse off
emotionally and financially.
Even though the character s situation is thus presented as a cycle and
the storytelling approach is episodic, the sequences depicted in the film
are not interchangeable; the three main episodes—Cabiria's experiences
with Lazzan, the pilgrimage to La Madonna del Divino Amo re, and the
courtship with Donofrio—escalate in emotional intensity, owing pri¬
marily to an escalation in the stakes for the main character.
The sequences in Cabiria run from seven to seventeen minutes,
though as originally screened, it had one 23-minute sequence, which is
worth discussing relative to the role that the sequence structure plays in
the maintaining of audience attention. Before the picture was screened
at Cannes, it had an additional seven-minute segment in the fourth se¬
quence, after the subject of the pilgrimage to La Madonna del Divino
Amore is discussed by Cabiria and her friends, and before they set out
on the pilgrimage. During this segment, Cabiria encounters an enig¬
matic man with a sack, and follows him around as he distributes food
and blankets to poor people living in caves outside of Home. A spirited
disagreement about the segment erupted between Fellini, who thought
it belonged in the final film, and the producer, Dino De Laurentiis, who
felt it slowed the pace to a point that was fatal. In the end, the picture
screened at Cannes without the segment, which was only restored in the
DVD version more than forty years later.
The segment itself is an odd one for several reasons. Cabiria is com¬
pletely passive in it—she participates only as an observer who asks ques¬
tions. Further, the only coiifUct in the segment—two people refusing to
answer questions that Cabiria puts to them—seems forced. These alone
not have been fatal to the segment, but what is noteworthy—from
3 sequence structure riewpoint—is what its presence does to the length
of the fourth sequence. Sequences that run more than fifteen minutes
— 80 —
82
SCREENWRITING
w
Fellini’s Nights of Cabiria: Mocturnal Episodes
83
run the risk of becoming tedious, because it's difficult to sustain one
line of dramatic or ironic tension for longer than that. With the '‘man
with the sack'' segment, the fourth sequence runs 23 minutes. Purther,
the segment is only vaguely related to the subject of the rest of the se¬
quence—the pilgrimage, and the chance for a miraculous transforma¬
tion. Confronted with an overlong sequence, a screenwriter ouglit to
strongly consider ways to set it up and develop it more economically.
The man with the sack sequence is too long for what it accomplishes,
and ultimately the film is probably better without it.
Sequence A: Giorgio
The picture opens with the first example of a device used skillfully
throughout the fi\m—preparation by contrast (see text box, page 24).
An exterior long shot reveals a man and woman in a loving relationship,
enioying a tryst in a romantic setting by a river. The use of a puzzle—
arousing the audience’s curiosity—is in play in the opening minute—
who are these two? What are the circumstances? The puzzle quickly
gives way to dramatic tension^ though, when the seemingly idyllic situa¬
tion is shattered by the man, who steals the woman’s purse, pushes her
into the river, and flees.
For the next three minutes, audience attention revolves around the
question of her survival. Here, in another example of preparation by
contrast, the dialogue among the rescuers suggests that she has died; a
late-arriving man pronounces her dead just before she comes back to
life. As soon as she does so, she inquires after Giorgio—the man who’d
pushed her into the water. The rescuers express perplexity, and Cabiria
angrily sets herself to the task of finding him.
On display in the first six minutes of the picture are the two chief
concerns of Cabiria—love and respectability. The indignity she’s suf¬
fered at Giorgio’s hands has obviously struck a sensitive spot in her, as
evidenced by her less than thankful attitude toward her rescuers. Just
how important her dignity is, and her love of love, becomes clearer
when she arrives at her shack. In her conversation with her friend
Wanda, she betrays herself as a woman deeply in denial—unwilling to
admit what the audience has seen and what Wanda suspects—that
Giorgio was not a lover at all but a user who seduced her, took advan¬
tage of her, and nearly kOled her for a meager amount of money in her
purse.
The chief dramatic tension of the sequence devolves around Cabiria
coming to terms^and to the truth—about Giorgio. The challenge for
the filmmaker is that this struggle is an internal one, and the great prob¬
lem of drama is that it gains its power by having the audience witness
an unfolding of life being acted out—as seen from the outside—and the
inner struggles of the characters can only be conveyed indirectly. How,
then, to make an internal straggle external and seeable?
After Wanda spells out the truth to Cabiria—that Giorgio pushed
him in the river for her money—TelLini relies primarily on props and
the Cabiria’s facial expressions to convey her struggle and transforma¬
tion. Cabiria, left alone by Wanda, storms angrily into her house, only
to be confronted by the photos of Giorgio on her dresser. Upon seeing
his image, she smiles and her anger subsides. She heads back out of the
house and paces, deep in thought, She picks up a chicken, strokes it,
talks to herself, realizing she might have died. With this realization set¬
ting in, she throws the chicken into the air—a concrete visual due to an
abrupt change in her inner state—and disposes of Giorgio’s photos and
aU. the other physical evidence of him by tossing them into a hre, all the
while verbally denouncing him. The scene dramatizes Cabiria casting
Giorgio out of her life, rvithout Giorgio even appearing in the scene.
After she destroys his effects, a scene of aftermath follows (see text
box, page 54), with Cabiria walking slowly into a darkening sky, hurling
a bottle in a last expression of anger.
Sequence B: Ladies’ Night Out
The second sequence has no causal connection to the first; the audience
is transported to a park where Cabiria. and her fellow prostitutes ply
their trade. This sequence has as its unifying element Cahiria’s desire to
seek a customer, which she finds in the movie star Lazzari.
More so than the films anaJyzed-bitherto, the exposition in the open¬
ing sequence of Nights of Cabiria is indirect, and information accumu¬
lates gradually. This gradual filling in of pieces of the puzzle of her life
continues in the second sequence. First, tlie ''Grande Dame” who strolls
on the far side of the street greets Cabiria with the statement ‘'Here
comes that psycho again!”—implying a routine and a past relationship,
and displaying an attitude. Cabiria immediately notices the new Fiat
that one of the hookers has purchased, and uses it as a springboard to
express her values—when you ride in a car, life is better; people think
84
85
SCREENWRITING
you're well-off—a secretaiy or a daddy's girl. Here, again, a concrete,
visual object is used to help express an inner state—aspiration.
A radio provides mambo musk, inspiring Cabiria to dance (planting
both motifs), while she trades insults with the grande dame across the
street. Cabiria seems to be enjoying herself until her adversary brings
up the issue of Giorgio, which causes Cabiria to rush across the street
to assault her. Here, again, a physical response is used to express Cabi-
ria's inner state—her sensitivity to issues that bear on her love life and
dignity.
Cabiria is dragged from the brav/l and into the Fiat, which speeds off.
In the ensuing conversation, Cabiria declares her self-sufficiency—she
doesn't need a man to take care of her—and insists on being let off in
the high-class district, where Amleto warns her she doesn't belong.
Eventually, Cabiria finds herself outside a fancy dub, where she in¬
sists on staying put despite the doorman's request that she get lost.
Here, she encounters the movie star Lazzari and his girlfriend Jessie in
the middle of a quarrel. In this scene Lazzari warns Jessie that that if
she walks away, it's over between them—the first dangling cause of the
picture.
Lazzari, left alone, invites Cabiria into his car, the car serving as a
big, elegant contrast to the tiny Fiat Cabiria had arrived in. With Cabi-
ria’s success in getting a customer at last, the resolution of the sequence
is at hand, but it plays out in a surprising way: instead of going to some
remote location, Lazzari talces her to another dub. Here, the issue of
class is played out, Cabiria being the lower-class “fish out of water," a
free spirit in a more formal world (tliis expressed with a payoff of tJie
mambo/dance motif), till at last Lazzari decides it's time to go. The se¬
quence ends with an appointment—Lazzari tells her they're heading to
his house for dinner—and a payoff—Cabiria insults the two high-class
prostitutes she'd first encountered after being dropped off in the high-
class district: she's hit it big,
Sequence C: A House As Beautiful as Lazzari
The third sequence runs fourteen and a half minutes and is centered
on the relationship of Cabiria and Lazzari. Tt plays out as an elaborate
preparation by contrast, in a distant echo of the opening sequence. For
die first nine minutes, the action brings Cabiria and Lazzari gradually
closer, both physically and emotionally^ till it appears they will h'ave an
F ellini’s Nights of Cabiria: Nocturnal Episodes
intimate encounter. The evening is interrupted at the last moment by
the return of Jessie, and Cabiria loses out again.
Though Lazzari could be described as the protagonist of the se¬
quence—his objective being an evening of amusement with his new
plaything—a street prostitute—the dramatic thrust of the scene is
muted. Lazzari is preoccupied with his problems with Jessie, while Cabi-
ria's awkwardness in the large, richly appointed mansion provides only
a minimal amount of conflict,
The sequence begins as Lazzari drives up to his mansion. Here, he
scolds his servant and warns him to tell Jessie he is asleep if she should
call, a dangling cause dosed off later in the sequence.
Upstairs, Cabiria finds herself fascinated by Lazzari's material wealth,
playing again on the issue of class and respectability. The two begin far
apart physically, with Cabiria standing awkwardly on the far side of the
bedroom, while Lazzari lounges oit his bed with his shoes still on. He
plays solemn music as a reflection of his somber inner state, and tosses
the photo of Jessie aside in an echo of Cabiria's rejection of Giorgio in
the opening sequence. The two gradually get acquainted,, with Lazzari
asking her about her background. In describing her life^ Cabiria empha¬
sizes her dignity, bragging about how she owns her own house and is
fi-iends only with Wanda—she does not hang out mth the other riffraff,
and rarely, if ever, sleeps under the arches.
Lazzari urges her to eat—an action that brings the two closer physi¬
cally to match their increa.sing personal familiarity. Cabiria confesses
she recognizes him as a movie star, then sits down with him and begins
to touch him, carrying out her job, but he tells her it’s not necessaryq
and instead answers her request for an autographed photo, She then
begins to serve the food, and the scene is set for a romantic evening: the
two are acquainted and clearly enjoying each other's company.
At this point, Jessie arrives at the house, closing off the dangling
causes established earlier, and Cabiria's expectations are shattered. Laz¬
zari shepherds her quickly into the bathroom and locks the door, prom¬
ising he'll get rid of Jessie in a minute.
When Jessie enters, dramatic tension and irony intensify the scene,
with Lazzari's objective quite simple: to get Jessie out of his bedroom
before Cabiria is discovered. While Cabiria watches through the key¬
hole, Lazzari's efforts sputter and he and Jessie wind up kissing on the
bed. In a powerful scene of aftermath, Cabiria slides backward from the
view in the keyhole, abandoned again.
86
87
SCREENWRfTING
Cabiria awakens the next morning and is escorted out of the bed¬
room; she only reluctantly accepts Lazzari’s money for the evenings
again expressing her strong sense of dignity.
Sequence D: The Pilgrimage to La Madonna del Divino
Amore
The episode with Lazzari is over; a visual clue is the only direct connec¬
tion between this sequence and the one before—Cabiria s umbrella^
which she’d carried resolutely through Sequence C. This, and a sarcastic
remark to Cabiria from one of the hookers about Alberto Lazzari, com¬
plete the references to that episode.
In the opening of the sixteen-minute fourth sequence—which is cen¬
tered on the pilgrimage to La Madonna del Divino Amore—Cabiria and
Wanda become reacquainted with Limpy, whose presence is explained
by Amleto, his nephew: they hope the Madonna will grant him a mira¬
cle—a dangling cause creating anticipation for the rest of the sequence.
The appointment for the pilgrimage is revealed, and Cabiria is noncom¬
mittal about going. In debating the merits of making the pilgrimage, she
demonstrates denial, claiming she needs no miracle because she needs
nothing, an utterance at odds with her behavior to this point. Soon, a
group of pilgrims walks by barefooted, on their way to the church, and
the atmosphere is transformed from nonchalant to deeply religious,
The scene now switches from the somber of night to bright daylight
and the festive atmosphere at the church.^ In the next nine minutes,
preparation by contrast is again in use, culminating in the failure of the
Madonna to bestow her miracle. From Cabiria’s initially flippant atti¬
tude, reinforced by the swirl of non-religious activities around her such
as the sale of prickly pears and souvenir photos, the mood gradually
becomes more somber and religious. Cabiria becomes gradually more
humble and fearful as the singing of hymns grows louder and the cries
for mercy from the pilgrims more intense. Her transformation is paral¬
leled by Limpy's progress toward the shrine, aided by Amleto, who teUs
him he feels the Madonna will show him mercy.
At last, Cabiria goes on her knees and tearfully pleads with the Ma¬
donna for help in changing her life (a request at odds with her self-
"^In the first released version; for the DVD version, see the introduction to
the chapter,
Felli ni’s Nights of Cabiria: Nocturnal Episodes
satisfied opinion early in the sequence), and Amleto lets go of Limpy
so he can receive a healing miracle and walk without crutches. Limpy
promptly falls down, and the scene switches to a picnic on the grounds
afterward. Limpy's failure to receive a miracle closes off the dangling
cause from the opening scene of the sequence.
While a scene of aftermath might typically be expected here—
marked by wordless performances, thick atmosphere, and somber
music appropriate for the profound disappointment Cabiria has just
suffered—the storytellers instead revive the carnival atmosphere of the
opening through accordion music and the mundane activities of food
and games. Cabiria, though, does not join in the fun, and promptly pro¬
nounces the pilgrimage a failure; no one has changed. Since the kind of
change Cabiria is seeking—a profound, spiritual, inner change—does
not lend itself to cinema, Limpy is employed as a reference point. The
wounds they all suffer are internal, but Limpy s is external; Cabiria’s
realization that no miracle has been bestowed on them has been drama¬
tized by Limpy’s fall.
In the argument that follows, Cabiria launches into a tirade provid¬
ing the dangling causes wMck propel the stor)^ through the remaining
three sequences: she vows to sell her house and move away from them,
saying she is not like them, After Wanda tries to calm her, she storms
away and slumps against a bus, looking longingly at the nuns passing
in the distance, and the mnsic changes from carnival to religious; the
aftermath scene is delivered at last.
Sequence E; The Magic Show
A contrast in light—night replaces day—marks the transition from the
fourth to fifth sequence. There is no causal connection except some ref¬
erences to a ride home in the previous sequence; the only visual connec¬
tion is Cabiriah costunne: her raincoat and scarf. The eleven-minute
sequence is unified by place (the theater) and action (the magic show,
and Cabiria’s reluctant participation in it).
Preparation by contrast begins almost immediately when Cabiria in¬
quires with the ticket clerk about the show's quality and he only
obliquely recommends it. When she arrives Inside, a patron is shotvn
sleeping in his seat, and on stage we catch the tail end of an uiiconvinc'
Ing magic trick, greeted by an unenthusiastic reaction from Cabiria.
88
89
SCREENWRlTiNG
The magician next announces a demonstration of hypnosis, and
quicldy asks for volunteers. After several men come up to the stage, he
requests a woman, and chooses Cabiria, who happens to be Just finding
her seat. Getting Cabiria onstage is a stor)l:elhng challenge, because the
idea that the magician just happens to choose her among all the women
in the theater runs the risk of seeming contrived, but if he does not pick
her, the sequence won't work. The solution is to make her resist vigor¬
ously the magician's entreaties until he finally has to come off the stage
and take her by the hand. Cabiria's resistance gives the audience a
glimpse of a reasonable alternative outcome (she refuses) before deliver¬
ing the actual outcome (she accepts), so the sense of spontaneity—as
opposed to contrivance—survives.
Just before she mounts the stage, Cabiria makes one more contribu¬
tion to the lowering of expectations for the magic show—dismissing it
as nothing but tricks. This preparation is paid off by contrast at last
when the magician “zaps'’ one of the participants in a dramatic demon¬
stration of mind control, then wows the audience—Cabiria included—
during the “boat ride.”
As the men file off the stage, Cabiria attempts to join them—giving
the audience another glimpse of a possible outcome (she doesn't partic¬
ipate) before the magician stops her and persuades her to stay. What
follows is yet another approach to studying the inner life of a character
in all her contradictions—making visible and actable what lies inside—
this time through the detdce of hypnosis,
The contrast between what Cabiria says about herself and the truth
is immediately demonstrated when the magician asks her where she
lives, and she gives two answers, one a lie, the other, under hypnosis,
the truth. The magician sizes her up and assumes she would like a hus¬
band; she declares forcefully that she is happy the way she is (a demon¬
stration of denial, given the pilgrimage she'd just been on), then, under
hypnosis again, acts out a scene of tenderness and longing that is in
direct contradiction to her consciously stated attitude toward marriage.
The climax of the hypnosis scene comes when Cabiria lays bare an¬
other issue for her—one of trust, of fear of betrayal by her lover—and
the magician abruptly ends the show. The hypnosis scene plants three
important motifs—the picking of flowers, the hat (of flowers), and the
name “Oscar.”
When Cabiria comes out of the spell and finds herself the object of
derisive laughter, her sensitivity to dignity is assaulted, setting up a situ¬
ation that connects this sequence more causally to the one that follows.
Fellini's Nights of Cabiria: Nocturnal Episodes
Sequence F: Donofrio
This sequence, which runs almost seventeen minutes, is centered on
dramatic tension: Donofrio’s pursuit of Cabiria. The arrival of Dono¬
frio, a self-styled accountant, marks the beginning of the fourth of the
four major episodes In the picture, and the one that is the most com¬
pletely developed. This episode, even more than the three before it, ends
in catastrophe, and like the others before, involves a considerable in¬
vestment in preparation by contrast. In this, Fellini was careful not only
in the storytelling but in the casting as well, choosing to place Francois
Perier—a French actor known to European audiences as a romantic
leading man—in the role of Donofrio, the scoundrel.
Donofrio approaches Cabiria as soon as she leaves the theater, and
overcomes her initial objections to his overtures, persuading her to join
him for a drink. In their conversation, Donofrio presents himself as a
man unique in the movie—he is kind, sensitive, and focused on her.
The tension in the scene is centered on Cabiria’s skepticism. By the end
of the scene he makes an appointment with her for the following Sun¬
day afternoon. His hand gesture—indicating seven o’clock—provides a
nonverbal dialogue hook into the following scene, where, at a busy train
station, the clock reads 7:00.
Cabiria arrives on time, and appears to have second thoughts before
Donofrio catches up to her and presents her with flowers—a brief rever¬
sal that allows a glimpse of an alternative ending (Cabiria never con¬
necting with him). Later, Cabiria confides with her friends about the
date—how positive the experience was, and how he paid for everything.
The other women are skeptical, especially Wanda, who asks her what
he’s after—a dangling cause clo'Sed off in the final sequence. Cabiria,
too, is somewhat skeptical—skepticism that helps to disarm any skepti¬
cism the audience may have tow'ard Donofrio, who truly seems a dream
come true. Cabiria reveals another appointment for the following night,
jnst before the police arrive, scattering everyone. The timing of the po¬
lice raid—die first in the picture—is critical, because at this point Cabi-
ria seems at last to have something vahiable (the budding relationship
mth Donofrio) that she risks losing. This inner concern is made visible
both in Cahiria’s loss of the c^ndy Donofrio had given her shortly after
the police arrive, and the fearful expression she has while hiding in the
bushes.
The dark light of the night raid gives way to the bright sunshine of
Cabiria’s next date with Donoirio, during which they get farther ac-
90
S C R E E N W R I T r N <3
quainted, though Donofrio always seems to keep his background some¬
what vague.
The scenes that follow work on the problem of making visible what
amounts to an inner transformation, from Cabiria's despair after the
pilgrimage to hope that Donofrio might just be the answer to her
prayer. Cabiria is shown listening somewhat contemplatively to musiCj
then taking a stroll outside her house, where she runs into Brother Gio¬
vanni and drey discuss God's grace. Giovanni urges her to get married,
and as he leaves, invites her to get in touch if she needs him—two dan¬
gling causes closed off during the final two sequences.
Bright day gives way to rainy night in the following scene, where
Cabiria is shown waiting for customers while apparently deep in
thought. When a customer shows up, she is too preoccupied to respond
to him.
Bright sunshine marks the transition to the next date Cabina has
with Donofrio. Here, Cabiria creates conflict immediately by telling him
she wants to break it off; he responds by proposing marriage. She greets
this with passionate skepticism—again functioning to disarm the skep¬
ticism of the audience of the likelihood of such a rapid courtship—and
in the end she begs him not to say he needs her if it isn't true—a payoff
of the line she'd spoken under hypnosis.
The resolution of the scene—and the sequence—comes in the fol¬
lowing scene, when Cabiria ecstatically announces to Wanda that she is
getting married. This marks the second culmination of the picture, the
resolution of the main tension—will Cabiria find love and respectabil¬
ity? The answer is an emphatic yes.
Cabiria tells Wanda her plans—a wedding in two weeks (an appoint
ment that is, of course, never kept), and her decision to sell the house
and everything she owns (a dangling cause that provides the central
focus of the following sequence).
Sequence G: Good-byes
The seventh sequence—the shortest in the film at just under seven min-
utes—contains only three scenes and is centered on Cabiria's task of
selling her house and all her belongings to begin a new life. Aside from
her ambivaJence at saying good-bye to her friend Wanda, and momen¬
tary doubts about the big change she’s making, there is little in the way
of tension in the sequence.
Fellini's Nights of Cabiria: Nocturnal Episodes 91
Figure 7. Cabiria delivers the news of her impending wedding in Nights of
Cabiria (1957). The scene marks the second culmination of the film, re¬
solving the main tension: will Cabiria find love and respectability? The
scene also closes off a cause left dangling in the previous scene—
Donofrio’s marriage proposal. (Frame enlargement)
In its first scene, Cabiria seeks out Brother Giovanni to confess to
him, closing off the dangling cause of the priest's invitation to stay in
touch. It also resoJves the religious motif in the film, giving the im¬
pression that the grace Cabiria had sought from the Madonna at the
pilgrimage has been given to her at last, and she in turn is now free
from sin.
In the following scene, Wanda hdps Cabiria pack the last of her be¬
longings. Here, there is little tension'beyond Wanda^s doubting Cabi-
ria’s decision to sell most of her belongings in addition to the house, a
subtle dangling cause picked up in the final sequence.
The final scene of the sequence-finds Cabiria saying her last good¬
bye to Wanda at the bus stop. Here, she predicts Wanda will get mar¬
ried, too—that she, too, mil get her miracle. As Wanda fades in the
distance, the sequence draws to a close, with a reasonable glimpse of the
resolution of the picture—a happy ending.
92
Fellini’s Nights ofCabiria: Nocturnal Episodes
Sequence H: Donofrio’s Betrayal
The final sequence, running just under thirteen minutes, provides the
actual ending, and it is a payoff in reverse of the “happy" fairy-tale
preparation to this point. The sequence is imbued with both dramatic
tension—will Donofrio succeed in stealing her money?—and ironic
tension—how will Cabiria react when this emotional freight train hits
her?
Figure S. Cabiria and Donofrio share a romantic moment in the tinal se¬
quence of Nights of Cabiria (1957). Note the similarities between this
image and the frame shown in Figure 9: Donofrio's sunglasses (which he
wears for the first time In this scene), and the composition of the frame—
his position and that of the river in the background—are an echo of the
shot of Giorgio just before he pushes Cabiria into the river (see Figure 9).
These similarities are the first clues the audience is given about the im¬
pending disaster, and as the sequence progresses, the clues become
more obvious and the resulting dramatic irony more intense, Director Fel¬
lini’s use of preparation by contrast—portraying Donofrio as a loving, kind-
hearted answer to Cabiria’s prayers only to have hinri later revealed to be a
scoundrel—involved not only the writing but also casting. Francois Perier,
chosen to play Donofrio, was known for his roles as a sympathetic roman¬
tic lead. (Frame enlargement)
The shift from happy to tragic ending comes gradually, and with the
shift comes the ironic tension. The first clue is the opening shot of the
sequence—the river, running upper left to lower right in the frame—the
same composition as the river in the opening sequence. The next clue
is on Donofrio^s face—the sunglasses that echo those of Giorgio.
Next comes Cabiria’s thick wad of money- she holds it, shows it to
him, tells him how much it is, and places it in a black purse, in yet
another echo of the opening sequence. Cabiria now verbally reinforces
the parallel, talldng to Donofrio about how some men are only after a
woman’s money. With these dries in place, Cabiria speaks about how
much she suffered to get the money, and her joy at escaping the life
she’s led, effectively raising the stakes, or at least reinforcing in the audi¬
ence how high the stakes are for her.
The two set out for a walk aC Donofrio’s urging, and wind up in the
woods, The dramatic tension in the journey is provided by Donofrio’s
urging her to come onward deeper into the woods, as against her own
preoccupation with the roniance of the moment. She stops to pick up
flowers—a payoff of what she had done under hypnosis—and wears a
Figure 9. Giorgio glimpses his surroundings Just before snatching Cabi-
ria's purse and shoving her into the river in the opening sequence of Nights
of Cabiria (1957). (Frame enfargment)
94
SCREENWRITING
Figure 10. A classic aftermath scene in the last sequence of Nights of
Cabiha (1957). After Donofrio betrays her, Cabiria lies on the ground in the
gathering darkness. The characteristics of a typical aftermath scene are
little or no dialogue, an intensity of atmosphere, and music. Aftermath
scenes allow the audience a chance to digest a particularly intense emo^
tional moment. Soon after this frame, Cabiria gets up and begins to walk
through the woods, and music arises from a group of young revelers.
(Frame enlargement)
white hat that echoes the garland of flowers the magician had given her
to wear on her head.
The two arrive at the river^s edge, where Cabiria laughingly recalls
the incident with Giorgio just before the moment when she recognizes
that Donofrio plans to do the same thing. With this, the payoff for the
half hour of preparation by contrast is at hand. Donofrio flees with the
money while Cabiria rolls on the ground in anguish, wishing for the
deliverance of death.
From these moments of despair the audience is delivered one of the
great aftermath scenes in cinema history. After a time lapse, Cabiria at
last gets to her feet and walks slowly out of the woods, where she word¬
lessly encounters a group of cheerful young people coming home from
a party, dancing and singing, surrounding her with music and goodwill
as she walks. Their joy proves infectious, and she is able to smile again.
Fellini's Nights of Cabiha: Nocturnal Episodes
95
NIGHTS OF CABIRIA
Sequence Breakdown
Seq. Description
ACT I
A Cabiria is pushed into the river, rescued, seeks Giorgio,
finally burns his personal effects (excludes opening
titles). Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Prolagonist.
Cabiria. Objective: lb hud Giorgio.
Point of attach Giorgio steals the purse.
B Cabiria gets into a fight at the park, goes off in the Piat,
connects with Lazzari and travels to a nightclub.
UmfyingAspect Dramatic Tension. Protagoniit Cabiria.
Objective: To get work.
Predicament: Ca.biria is a low-class hooker who wa]its
to be respectable and to be loTed.
ACT II
(Main tension: Will Cabhia find love and respectability?)
C Cabiria connects with Lazzaii in his bedroom, then 14:25 46:37
spends the night in the bathroom. Unifying Aspect. (40%)
Dramatic Tension. ArofrtyojNfsr Lazz-aii, Objective: A
quiet evening with Cabiria.
D Cabiria back in the park; Limpy introduced, the 16:00 1:02:37
pilgrims go by; Cabiria and her friends go to the (57%)
pilgrimage, are disappointed. Unifying Aspect. Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist Cabiria. Ohjeciwe: Help from (he
Madonna.
E Cabiria goes to the playhouse and reveals herself under 11:14 1:13:51
hypnosis. L/^riyyingAspec.f: DramaticTension. (67%)
Protagonist Cabiria. Objective: To enjoy a show.
F In this sequence, Cabiria is wooed by Donofrio, who 16:49 1:30:40
finally proposes to her. Unifying Aspect Dramatic (82%)
Tension. Donofrio, Objective: Cabiria.
Second Culmination: Cabiria breaks the news to
Wanda: He loves mcl
ACT ni
G The main tension is resolved—Cabiria has apparently 6:55 1:37:35
found love and respectability. The new third-act tension (89%)
involves pursuing this new re-lationship of love and
marriage. In this sequeTice> Cahiria packs, sells most of
her belongings, and says her good-byes. Unifying Aspect
Dramatic Tension. Protagojnst Cabiria. Objective: To
leave her old life behind
Running
Length Time
15:05 15:05
( 11 %)
17:07 32:12
(27%)
96
screenwriting
H Cabiria enjoys dinner with Donofrio; they take a walk
in the woods; she is crushed by disillusionment when he
steals her rnoney. Unijy'mg Aspect. Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist Cabiria. Objective: A happy marriage.
Resolution: Open-ended.
] 2;41 1 : 50:16
( 100 %)
North by Northwest: 1,700
Miles in Nine Sequences
All writeis should be awaie of the profound distinction betM^een a story
(narrative) and the telling of a story (narration). A single story can be
told any number of different ways, primarily by manipulating what the
audience knows and when it knows it. The impact of the story ofDoitble
Indemnity {Chapter 4) would have been very different if it had been
told in simple chronological order. Likewise the experience of The Shop
Around the Coriier (Chapter 3) would be different if the audience didn t
find out until the end of the movie that Klara was Kialik's ''dear friend.'*
In either case, the story may be identical but the telling of determines
how movies play to the audience.
North by Northwest^ made in 1959 at the height of director Alfred
Hitchcock’s mastery of the form, is what one might call an exiample of
'pure storytelling'b the storytelling is so virtiiosic that it conceals the
fact that the underlying story is nonsensical. This is storjrieLing sleight
of hand: by skillfully directing audience attention toward the future, the
viewer is constantly distracted from considering the gaps and implausi-
bilities in the story.
In its development. North hy iVcirtkwcstbegan with the humble inspi-
tatioji of the main character being a man that doesnt exist, and the
vague notion that the story should involve travel in a northwest direc¬
tion. From this, writer Ernest Lehman and director Alfred Hitchcock
Crafted a film that has withstood the test of time, It was not written
explicitly in sequences (in fact, Lehman was surprised by one inter-
— 97 —
98
SCREENWRITING
I
jsjorth by Northwest: 1,700 Miles in Nine Sequences
99
viewer who asserted that the story had ten parts to it). On close analysis,
though, the internal structure of nine sequences becomes readily appar¬
ent—nine shorter films, ranging in length from nine to eighteen min¬
utes—nested inside the one larger film. Each follows a very direct
dramatic impulse; the protagonist of each sequence is the protagonist
of the picture, and he has very specific objectives in each. Along the way,
the action is constantly enhanced by the play of various layers of dra¬
matic irony.
Sequence Assault with a gun, a bourbon and a
sports cat
The movie begins emphatically in medias res, that is, with life unfolding
and fully in bloom when the audience arrives to view it. Unlike the
other films analyzed in this volume, the use of a puz;zle is less apparent
in hooking the audience in the opening moments. The title sequence
employs a musical overture that suggests action/adventure, and the ti¬
tles work themselves out as something of a puzzle, gradually transform¬
ing abstract lines into the lines of the modernist United Nations
building, but when the dialogue begins, we discover the protagonist,
Roger 0. Thornhill, swept up in the middle of an ordinary, busy day,
dictating instructions to his secretary.
In the dialogue, several appointments are made with business associ¬
ates, and some exposition occurs as well—notably Roger's relationship
with his girlfriend and his mother, and his history of drinking to excess,
at least in the opinion of his mother. In this dialogue, the appointments
made in the future are the most crucial aspect, because the more per¬
suasive our sense of the future plans of the protagonist, the more effec¬
tive is his sudden abduction, which disrupts those plans.
The telegraphing of Roger's itinerary continues in the Oak Room
bar, where he arranges to get a telegram in order to alert his mother of
their theater arrangements that night. This action leads inadvertently to
his being mistaken for Kaplan, and abducted by two henchmen.
In all, the opening four minutes of the picture are a tour de force in
establishing the normal routine of a character at the outset of a film.
They are minutes rich with content about a character’s life—his manner
and style, his relationships, his past and plans—issues that are impor¬
tant in the opening minutes of any film, hut in this case made more
crucial by the fact that this character's ver}^ identity is soon to be ques¬
tioned. Without firmly establishing who he is quickly, there may be
some doubt in the viewer s mind as to whether ox not he is telling the
truth when he denies he is Kaplan. While such a situation can be useful
in some movies, in this one it would serve only as a distraction.
When Roger is abducted, the henchmen telegraph the agenda some¬
what obliquely: a car is waiting outside, Roger is to say nothing or risk
losing his life. The mysterious abduction provides, in effect, the curios¬
ity-arousing puzzle missing in the opening moments of the picture.
Roger's abduction marks the end of the ^‘first act’' of the 16-minute
sequence; the rest is driven by simple dramatic tension; Roger tiying to
escape his abductors. In the car, his attempts escalate, from negotiation
to a physical attempt to get out of the car. Once at the Townsend man¬
sion, he again tries to reason Avith his adversar)^ this time Vandannn
(who he mistakes as "Townsend’'), and when this fails, tries to escape
by physical means, only to be stopped by Vandamm’s men.
In his confrontation with Vandamm, several examples of telegraph¬
ing come into play. Roger repeats his appointment at the Winter Gar¬
den Theater that evening, While trying to rebut Roger's claim that he is
not Kaplan, Vandamm reads from an itinerary featuring past and future
engagements for this Mr. Kaplan. There are also references to dinner
guests who are waiting for him—a deadline that adds intensity to the
scene through time pressure, and also signals hoAv long it will last, Van¬
damm closes the scene with two ominous dangling causes: a warning in
which he tells Roger he wants to give him an opportunity of surviving
the evening, and a wish of "pleasant journey," after he tells his hench¬
man to give Roger a drink.
When Roger is placed, drunk, in the Mercedes, the "third act" of the
sequence begins: what had been a question about whether or not Roger
will escape is narrowed to a question of whether or not he'll survive the
car ride.
The four-minute chase sequence ends with Roger involved in a traffic
accident with a police car, and the henchmen skulking away. This pro¬
vides the resolution to the dramatic tension of the sequence: Roger suc¬
ceeds in escaping. It also closes off the dangling causes established
earlier by Vandamm involving the. Threats to his survival. Roger's safe
arrival into the hands of the police does not resolve the mystery of his
abduction, though, and raises new questions about how he ^vilJ fare in
police custody. The.w are the questions that bind the first sequence to
the second.
100
SCREENWRITING
North by Northwest: 1,700 Miles in Nine Sequences
101
Sequence B: Proving His Innocence
Roger is taken to the police station, where his next objective soon be¬
comes apparent: convincing the police of the truth of his story about
being abducted. The stakes rise quickly when the police disclose the car
he was driving was stolen. Roger calls his mother for help and an ap¬
pointment is made for Roger’s lawyer to appear the following morning.
The ''first act” of the nine-minute sequence ends with Roger’s attor¬
ney making the case for Roger’s innocence in the courtroom. Here, an
appointment is made for the trial to begin the following evening, and
the judge has the county detectives called in to investigate. The court¬
room scene ends \vith a dialogue hook, with the judge telling Roger of
his intention to find out if Roger had made up the story.
The film immediately switches to the Townsend residence, where
that intention is set in action, with the arrival of Roger, his mother, his
attorney, and the detectives. The scene at the mansion is driven by sim¬
ple dramatic tension—Roger wants to prove his story is true, and the
obstacles he encounters are the lack of physical evidence (absence of
stains on the couch, absence of liquor in the cabinet), and a phony eye¬
witness (“Mrs. Townsend”) who undermines his story with lies.
The scene culminates with the claim by the woman that her husband
is addressing the General Assembly of the United Nations—a bit of in¬
formation that demolishes Roger’s allegations in the eyes of the detec¬
tives.
The sequence ends with the detectives expressing their intent to call
off the investigation, closing off the judge’s dangling cause about ascer¬
taining the truth of Roger’s story, and leaving Roger to prove his inno¬
cence on his own, The last shot of the sequence shows one of the
henchmen disguised as a gardener watching as the police car drives
away—this visual clue confirms Roger’s story in the audience’s mind
even as the police have come to tlie opposite conclusion. It also provides
something of a visual dangling cause—suggesting that even as Roger
must deal with the police, his problems with the abductors are not yet
over.
Sequence C: Pursuing Kaplan to the UN
First act of the picture could be said to take place here: it is by now dear
who the protagonist is (Roger) and what his objective is: to clear his
name. The story unfolds henceforth with this objective driving the ac¬
tion. Yet at this point Roger still seems to have choices that can easily
take him out of the story: as his mother suggests, he could plead guilty
and pay a fine and be done with it. It isn't until the end of the 11-minute
third sequence that Roger finds himself falsely accused of murder, with
both the police and Vand.anim’s men after him, and no choice but to
pursue the mystery and clear his name. The main tension is thus initi¬
ated after three sequences, not two.
Sequence C is unified by Roger’s desire to get to the bottom of the
mystery himself, after the fiasco with the county detectives, It begins
with Roger and his mother arriving at the Plaza Hotel and discovering
that a Mr. Kaplan is in fact staying there, but that he is out and has not
answered his phone in two days. Roger reveals the means by which he
plans to overcome this obstacle by bribing his mother into getting him
the key—another example of a visual dangling cause, which hooks di¬
rectly into the following scene.
The “first acf ’ of the sequence ends with Roger and liis mother ap¬
proaching Kaplan’s hotel room and beginning their investigation. WTrile
the scene in the hotel room features some conflict between Roger and
his mother, it is driven chiefly by ironic tension—the audience’s knowl¬
edge that the two are there under false pretences, leading to fear that
they will be discovered by the maid, the valet, and possibly the mysteri¬
ous Kaplan himself
The search of the room is interrupted by a phone call from one of
Vandamm’s men, who makes an implied threat; the pursuit for the so¬
lution to the mystery is immediately transformed into an escape at¬
tempt, with Roger successfully evading the two killers at the hotel, then
setting off for the United Nations to resume his quest to solve the mys¬
tery.
The scenes at the UN, when he inquires after Townsend and eventu¬
ally catches up to him, are driven by ironic rather than dramatic ten¬
sion, with the audience forewarned about the pursuit and approach of
the killers, while Roger remains unaware until a knife winds up in the
back of Townsend,
This incident provides the resolution to the dramatic tension of the
sequence: Roger's pursuit of a solution to the niysterj^ has failed, and
his attempts to solve it have led to his being wanted for murder,
Transition: The Intelligence Agency
A brief transition scene serves as a curtain between Sequence C and D,
and Act I and II. The film moves to Washington DC, where intelligence
102
103
SCREENWRITING
agents discuss the murder at the UN in a recapitulation scene (see text
box, page 29) that provides, after almost forty minutes of mystery, some
exposition that explains that mystery—but to the audience only. In so
doing, the storytellers initiate the first sustained layer of ironic ten¬
sion—the audience is made aware that George Kaplan, the man Van-
damm thought he was kidnapping when his men abducted Roger, is a
fiction created by American intelligence operatives to divert suspicion
from their own, unnamed agent. Roger, naturally, is unaware of this.
By the end of this transition scene, it is emphatically clear who the
protagonist is, what he wants (to clear his name of the murder and get
to the bottom of the mystery), and what the obstacles are (he is wanted
both by the police and the enemy agents, and is unaware of the conspir¬
acy that surrounds his predicament). The main tension is thus estab¬
lished: Will Roger succeed in evading the police and enemy agents long
enough to solve the mystery and clear his name? The scene ends with
an ominous dialogue hook: after voicing doubt about Roger’s chances
of survival, the female agent says, ‘‘Good-bye, Mr. Thornhill, wherever
you are.”
Sequence D: The 20th Century Limited
The fourth sequence, the longest one at eighteen and a half minutes, is
unified by location—the train ride on The 20th Century Limited—and
by a line of dramatic tension created by Roger's objective of evading the
police long enough to make it to Chicago, where he hopes to meet up
with the mysterious George Kaplan and resolve the mystery. In this, the
dramatic tension of the sequence is essentially the same as that of the
picture as a whole. Further, much of the time in the sequence is dedi¬
cated to the relationship between Roger and Eve; in this sequence it is
justified in the context of the plot (Roger takes refuge 'with her to avoid
the police), but at the same time the romance developed here plays a
crucial role in all of the later sequences.
The sequence begins with a brief recapitulation scene in a phone
booth at Grand Central Station, where Roger talks to his mother and
recouj^ts his predicament (he can’t go to the police, and Kaplan is the
only one who can solve the mystejy) and telegraphs his plans (heading
by train to the Ambassador East Hotel in Chicago, where he has learned
that Kaplan is staying).
North by Northwest: T,7QO Miles in Nine Sequences
Roger’s first task is to get onto the train, in which he overcomes the
obstacles of a suspicious ticket man and some police. He is unexpectedly
aided by Eve, who diverts the police while he hides in the bathroom.
The use of Eve in this manner—and their chance meeting—is a risky
storytelling strategy since it is an example of a coincidence that helps
the main character. The sense of contrivance is diminished considerably
later when it is revealed that Eve has ulterior motives, and is mitigated
somewhat by the star power of the cast—the sense that the attractive-
nes.s of Cary Grant might be enough for a young female stranger to do
him a favor (the positive reaction of the bedridden female in the hospi¬
tal in Sequence H certainly speaks to this).
The idea of a sexual attraction is reinforced shortly afterwardj when
Roger is seated at Eve’s table in the dining car, and she confesses she
tipped the waiter to seat him tliere. The scene itself is characterized by
sexual tension, with Eve leading the way to the seduction and Roger the
willing target The ironic tension of Rogers secret helps give the scene
an intensity that it would otherwise lack due to the absence of any real
conflict.
Shortly after the moment of recognition—Eve reveals she knows his
identity and that he’s wanted for murder—the arrival of the police rein¬
troduces the dramatic tension of Roger’s need to evade capture.
Eve proceeds to help Roger again, lying to the police about him while
he hides in the bunk. Here, again to help dispel the sense of contrivance
(a female stranger who just happens to want to help hiTn), Roger asks
Eve straight out why she is so good to him—and she replies again with
sexual innuendo. Having a character raise a troublesome story issue like
this is a useful way for writers to disarm the skepticism such issues
might arouse iu an audience.
In a rather slow-paced scene after the police leave, the sexual tension
is released between the two, interrupted only by the porter, who arrives
to prepare the bed. The arrival of the porter, and the cutaway that re¬
sults to Roger hiding in the bathroom, serves the dual function of inter¬
rupting the lovemaking so as to intensify the anticipation of its
resumption (a form of retardation), and the plot function of allowing
Eve a chance to give the porter the message that reveals to the audience
the true reason why ^he’s been -so good to Roger—she's working for
Vandamm.
Roger and Eve continue their lovemaking after the porter leaves, the
scene ending with a dangling cause (Eve telling Roger he’ll have to sleep
On the floor that night) and a furtive look of apprehension on her face,
104
s C R E E N W R I TI N e
f\lortn by Northwest; 1,700 Miles in Nine Sequences
105
which Roger can’t see. This look provides a visual hook into the next
scene, in which the porter delivers the note to Leonard and Vandamm.
This is the second major scene of revelation—Roger is not only unaware
of the nature of Kaplan (he doesn’t exist) and the machinations of the
Professor and his men, but also unaware that the woman he is falling m
love with is working for his enemies.
The sequence ends with an unspoken dialogue hook: the note itself,
which reads “What do I do with him in the morning? -Eve.”
Sequence E: An Appointment With a Crop Duster
This sequence runs about sixteen minutes and is unified by Roger’s at¬
tempt to meet Mr. Kaplan. Because of the revelation in the preceding
sequence, all scenes between Roger and Eve are now infused with ironic
tension, with the audience’s knowledge of Eve’s secret—that she is lying
to him and is conspiring to kill him, not help him.
The sequence begins with Roger, now dressed as a porter, accompa¬
nying Eve out of the train in Chicago. Both dramatic irony and tension
inform the scene, with Roger trying to conceal his identity from the po¬
lice while Eve fends them off once more. Once the immediate danger
has passed, when Eve offers to help set up the appointment with Kaplan,
the full force of her deceit is felt. The blocking of the scene also allows
the audience to see another side of her as well—she turns away from
him somewhat wistfully after he mentions that she’s the smartest girl
he s ever spent a night with on a train, concealing from him her heartfelt
concern for his fate.
The police discovery of the porter who’d had his uniform stolen
leads to a sudden complication—the police start checking out all the
porters. By this time, though, Roger has changed back into civilian
clothes.
While Roger shaves in the men’s room, Eve makes furtive arrange¬
ments on the phone with Vandamm’s assistant. Leonard. When she re¬
connects with Roger, she fills him in on the details of this appointment.
The scene ends with more elements of the future—Roger thanking her
and expressing his desire to stay in touch witla her, the moments made
more poignant again by the dramatic irony—her conspiracy to kill him
With the appointment to meet Kaplan arranged, the tension of the
sequence is set up, and Us “second act” begins, wth Roger’s arrival at
Prairie Stop for his memorable encounter with the crop duster. The
seven minutes that elapse between Roger's arrival at Prairie Stop> and
the attack of the crop duster, are a powerful example of retardation (see
text box, page 24). Clearly, in plot terms, Roger could have been at¬
tacked immediately after he gets off the bus, but the intensity of the
experience would have been muted considerably.
The means by which the anticipation is created for this scene in¬
volved careful choices by the storytellers in the hierarchy oflcnowiedge
they disclose Co the audience. The viewer brows that Eve is conspiring
to do Roger harm, but the means by which this harm is to come to him
is withheld from the audience. Thus, for that seven minutes while Roger
is waiting, the audience is secretly aware that danger can lurk from any
number of directions, and each car, truck, bus, or person who arrives is
potentially a dealer in death. The suspense is thus milked to maximum
effect, something impossible if the audience were told, for example in
the phone booth scene at the train station, that a crop duster would be
used.
Once the crop duster attacks, the "‘third act*' of the sequence is at
hand: Roger is no longer seeking Kaplan, he is merely trying to survive.
He makes several attempts to evade the crop duster^ settling at last on
stopping the tanker truck and stealing the pickup truck after the ensuing
explosion.
The crop duster scene is perhaps the best example in the film of
'"pure storytelling,’' since upon closer scrutiny, it is revealed as illogical
nonsense. Aside from the more obvious logical problem concerning the
clumsy choice of weapon—a crop duster, armed with a machine gun
no less (a crop duster killing someone may seem Like an accident, but a
crop duster that puts bullet holes in a victim is sure to arouse suspicion
somewhere along the line), there is the deeper logical problem of just
who Vandamm and his men think Roger is planning to meet The story
is premised on the notion that Vandamm believes Roger is Kaplan; if
sOj how could they expect to lure him to some remote location to meet
Kaplan?
That these glaring “plot holes” are not glaring at all, and in fact are
difficult to notice, is a tribute to the storytelling skill of Hitchcock and
Lehman. They have crafted the scene so carefully to exploit the audi¬
ence’s hopes and fears about Roger, and given it such an exciting tex¬
ture, that the experience simply overpowers any interest a viewer might
have in analyzing the logic of the situation. hJojth by hlorthwest demon¬
strates that in order to succeed, a film doesn’t need a story, only the
impression that there's a story.
106
SCREHNW RITINg
(^lorthwest: 1,700 Miles in Nine Sequences
107
Sequence F: Appointment at the Ambassador East
In this sequence, which runs almost eighteen minutes, Roger’s focus
shifts from trying to meet Kaplan to trying to discover the truth about
Eve, and it is this thrust that provides the primary line of tension in the
sequence and its unifying aspect.
It begins with a visual link to the previous sequence—the pickup
truck Roger had stolen in the previous scene is shown being examined
by police, abandoned on a street in Chicago, the telltale refrigerator in
the back making the identification certain.
Next Roger is shown approaching the Ambassador East Hotel, a lo¬
cation telegraphed both in the opening sequence and early in the second
act. Roger inquires here about Kaplan, and discovers the man had
checked out before Eve claimed she spoke to him that morning—
leading Roger to the recognition that she had been part of the conspir¬
acy to kill him. This realization creates a new hierarchy of knowledge,
because although Roger is now aware Eve is working against him, he
doesn’t reveal that he knows this to Eve. Instead of being equal to her
in knowledge, he moves one level ahead.
By chance, Roger spots Eve going into the elevator, and manages to
locate her room. In the scene that follows, Eve betrays obvious relief
that he’d survived, and obvious affection for him, which he spurns. He
proceeds to question her, not letting on that he knows what she’d tried
to do. Although there is conflict in the scene—Roger is pursuing the
truth about her while she’s trying to deflect it—the primary tool used is
dramatic irony—the fact that we know that he knows but she doesn't.
This allows us to enjoy the way Roger toys with her with his questions
and observations.
In their exchange, Roger initiates several dangling causes—revealing
his plans to keep her in his sight at all times—'Togetherness”—from
now on. This encourages her to make her first attempt to get away from
him—asking him to leave. He manages to persuade her to let them have
one last meal; she manipulates the situation to escape while he’s in the
shower, and he in turn uses a clue she left behind—the address of her
destination—to continue his pursuit.
He arrives at an art auction and discovers Eve together with Leonard
and Vandamm, a moment of recognition that completely resolves the
line of dramatic irony initiated with the note from Eve to Vandamm on
the train at the end of Sequence D.
^fter tin exchange of words with Vandamm, in which[;^ pieces to¬
gether most of the puzzle and Eve’s involvement in it, thq^ '‘third act" of
die sequence begins: Roger declares his intention to go^ to police,
and his pursuit of Eve soon turns into an attempt to esca^^pe auction
house alive. The sequence ends with Roger’s success in police
to the auction house; as he’s led away, another visual da^j^gPng cause is
initiated: the Professor is seen in a phone booth making, urgent call.
Sequence G; A Harebrained Scheme
This twelve-minute sequence is unified by dramatic centering
on whether Roger will succeed in getting Eve out of dan^gg^ While trav¬
eling to the police station, Roger discloses his identit}^ to ^ xh^ police, who
then, unexpectedly, deliver Roger into the custody of Professor at
the Chicago Airport. Here, the Professor reveals to xh^ fact that
Kaplan does not exist—a scene of recognition closing o^ff g jj-a-
matic irony sustained since Sequence D—^recapitulat^^^ some of the
story (part of this obscured hy the sound of an aircraft- engine so as to
avoid repetition), and telegraphs a future appointment^ jn Rapid City,
South Dakota, The dialogue-heavy scene is sustained bjy dramatic ten¬
sion—the Professor’s desire to get Roger to cooperate him, both
in moving faster so they don't miss the plane, and in Tbretending to be
Kaplan for another 24 hours, [ust as it seems he is goi[j^g xo get
Roger’s cooperation, the Professor discloses Eves role gg American
agent. The Professor’s dangling cause—'"Much more tl^^^ her life is at
stake”—is reinforced by Roger’s anguished reaction, ancq ^oth provide a
hook into the next scene, which begins with a shot of Rushmore.
When Roger learns that there is no Kaplan, and tha^[^ authorities
know he’s innocent, the main tension (''Will Roger evading
the police and enemy agents long enough to solve the ^ysteiy and clear
his name?”) is resolved, and thus the second culminatqQj^—Qf
second act—is at hand- In the very scene that it s resOjtygd, a new and
urgent tension takes over which unifies the action of %e third act: wiU
Roger be able to rescue Eve?
Roger’s arrival at Mount Rushmore doses off the d[angling cause in
the previous scene initiated by the professor—his requ^^^-^ xhdit Roger go
on being Kaplan for the next 24 hours, The scene bel^^^Q Roger and
the Professor at the foot of Mount Rushmore unfolds ^ scene of reca¬
pitulation—the Professor recounts how Roger mana^gd to get Eve in
109
108
SCREENWRfTING
f^Qfih fpy Northwest: 1,700 Miles in Mine Sequences
Figure 11. Recapitulation scene: Thornhill and the Professor review what
got them to this point, and what hopes and fears they have for their up-
Vandamm in Sequence G of North by Northwest
(1959). The scene completes the setup for the sequence, which is unified
by dramatic tension surrounding the rescue of Eve. Recapitulation scenes
are common in films that have complicated plots, such as mysteries and
thrillers. They function to keep the audience oriented so they can focus on
wondering what is going to happen next, rather than wondering what the
film IS about. (Frame enlargement)
trouble and of preparation—the scene is rife with dangling causes- the
Professor supposing that the face of Teddy Roosevelt on the monument
IS warning Roger to “speak softly and carry a big stick,” and Roger
countering that the message is that he shouldn’t go through with tire
harebrained scheme.” The scene also contains some exposition—
namely, a meeting has been set up (presumably involving Roger, Van-
damra, and Eve). Revealing the information here obviates the need to
show scenes of the meeting being set up with phone calls and other in¬
formation exchanged between Roger and Vandamm, The scene ends
with the Professor establishing an appointment—Vandamm is sched¬
uled to leave that night—and a dangling cause—his assurance tliat after
that night, Roger and Eve will be free to pursue their relationship.
With this setup complete, Vandamm, Eve, and Leonard arrive, and
the scheme—the precise nature of which has been withheld from the
audience—is set in motion. The withholding of this information en¬
ables the storytellers to work with both dramatic irony and surprise in
the scene dramatic irony because we now know that Roger is pretend¬
ing an American agent and Vandamm doesn't know it, and sur¬
prise because the storytellers can give the impression that Eve's
behavior—storming away from Vandamm and Roger, then shooting
the latter—are not part of the plan but rather a sign that the plan has
gone terribly wrong.
The sequence ends with an apparently negative resolution: Roger has
failed to rescue EvCj and in fact winds up shot and conveyed from the
scene in a vehicle.
Sequence H; Roger Tries to Spring Eve
The station wagon stops in a wooded area^ and here a surprise twist
reveals that Roger is in fact unhurt, and that the “scheme’' Roger
obliquely referred to just prior to Vandamm’s arrival at the cafe in-
Yolved a fake shooting. Eve is already waiting for Roger there^ and the
two reintroduce themselves, for the first time without any secret role-
playing on Eve’s part. There is no tension in the scene—dramatic or
ironic. It pl'ays instead like an epilogue^ and could reasonably suffice for
the end of the movie—Roger has cleared his name, and now he has the
girl—except for tlie new surprise Avist at the end of it—Eve is going to
put herself in danger that night once again^ this time on board Van¬
damm’s plane. This revelation brings on the only conflict in the scene,
when Roger raises his objections, but he is quickly subdued and Eve
departs in a hurry to make her appointment.
The scene switches to Roger’s hospital room, where he moves about
like a caged animal, trying the door, then feigning cooperation with the
Professor when the latter enters. Roger claims he’s already lost interest
in Eve, and the Professor replies with a deadline: Eve will be gone within
an hour. Roger sends the Professor on an errand to get some bourbon
{an oblique payoff to the bourbon that Vandamm’s henchman had
poured into him in the opening sequence), then makes his intentions
clear: he plans to escape from the hospital room, then rescue Eve. As
soon as the Professor leaves, the “first act” of the eleven-minute se¬
quence ends and its unifying dramatic tension—^will Roger rescue
Eve?—is initiated,
Roger makes his escape from the hospital room, then takes a cab to
Vandamm’s place. Here, he surreptitiously surveys the layout of the
house, then finds a location from which to secretly observe the goings-
110
SCREEK WRITING
on inside. He nearly succeeds in attracting Eve's attention with a stone,
then finds his efforts thwarted by Leonard's intrusion.
This failure leads unexpectedly to Roger s witnessing a conversation
between Vandamm and Leonard in which the latter reveals both the
''secret” the spies have been keeping—government secrets smuggled out
of the country on microfilm hidden in the artwork—and the fact that
Eve used blanks in shooting Roger, exposing her as a double agent.
This scene of revelation opens a new layer of irony—Roger is now
aware of imminent danger (a new dangling cause expressed by Van¬
damm: “This matter is best handled from a great height, over water”)
and Eve is not. The realization makes his quest to rescue her even more
urgent by raising the stakes—she has gone from going on a dangerous
mission to going on a doomed one.
Roger now turns his attention to contacting Eve, who has gone back
to her bedroom. He narrowly misses her, then uses a note written on
one of his matchbooks—with a distinctive “R.O.T,” logo planted ear¬
lier—to get her attention. When she joins him in her room, the irony is
resolved as Roger spells out the situation and the danger. As Eve returns
to the others, Roger utters a desperate warning—a dangling cause—
“Whatever you do, don't get on that plane!”
Figure 12. Roger succeeds m rescuing Eve from Vandamm, resolving the
dramatic tension of Sequence H in North by Wc>rt/?wesf (1959). The mo¬
ment she enters the car, though, the chase is on, introducing a new ten¬
sion that unifies the final sequence: can Roger and Eve escape from
Vandamm and his men? (Frame enlargement)
hv Northwest: 1,700 Miles in Nine Sequence s
111
This cause dangles for the next several minutes as Eve is led steadily
..ward the plane Ad Roger is unexpectedly detained at gunpoint by
Lndamm’s servant. Just before Eve steps onto the plane, gunshots
mark Roger’s escape, and in the confusion Eve grabs the statue with the
microfilm from Vandamm and runs to Roger, who has hopped into a
A. With Eve and Roger safely In tlie car, the tension of the sequence is
resolved: Roger lias succeeded in rescuing Eve from Vandamm. Now a
new question arises in the last sequence: can Roger and Eve escape alive.
Sequence 1: Chase on Mount Roshmore
The final sequence runs just under ten minutes. At this point, all the
many layers of dramatic irony that embroider the film have been re^
solved, and the sequence is unified purely by the dramatic tension sur^
rounding the chase. Roger and Eve are unable to drive the car through
the locked gate, so they set off on foot and wind up atop Mount Rus -
more Here they fight off one assailant, then, with both Eve and Roger
dangling on the sheer rock face, beg Leonard for telp. He chooses in¬
stead to kill them, and before he can do so, he is himself ipkd by the
sheriff, who has arrived in a timely manner with the Professor at his
side and Vandamm already in. custody.
The epUogue—Rogei and Eve's honeymoon night—lasts just a
minute.
112
SCREENWRITING
NORTH BY NORTHWEST
Sequence Breakdown
Seq. Description
ACT I
A Roger, introduced in middle of his busy corporate life,
is mistaken for George Kaplan and abducted, and
escapes in a wild ride in a Mercedes (excludes opening
titles). Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist:
Roger. Objective: To escape his abductors.
Point of attack: Roger's abduction.
B Roger attempts to get the police to believe his story.
After revisiting the Townsend residence, the police
disbelieve him. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist Roger. Objective: To persuade the police.
C Roger enlists his mother's hdp in finding Kaplan; winds
up framed for Townsend's murder. Unifi^ing Aspect.
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Roger. Objective: To find
Kaplan.
Predicament: Roger, framed for murder and wanted
by spies, must try to clear his name to survive.
TRANSITION SCENE: Intelligence bureau revelation/ 2:55 39;1I
exposition
ACT II (Main tension: Will Roger succeed in clearing his name?)
D Roger finds refuge on The 20'^ Century Limited, 18:32 57:43
encounters Eve; ends with the revelation that Eve is (43%)
working for Vandamm. Unifying Aspect. Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist. Roger. Objective: To get to Chicago
without being discovered,
E Roger goes to meet Kaplan and instead meets crop 15:55 1:13:38
duster. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist (55%)
Roger. Objective: To meet Kaplan.
f irsf Culmination: After crop duster scene, Roger
realizes that Eve has betrayed him (1:1.5:00—56%).
F Roger discovers that Eve has betrayed him—follows her 17:48 1:31:26
to the auction, from which he makes a novel escape. (68%)
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist: Roger.
Objective: To get to the truth about Eve.
ACT III
G Roger is taken to airport—the Professor reveals the 11:53 1:43:17
truth to him. The main tension—will Roger clear his (77%)
name?—has now been resolved and a new 3'^-act
Running
Length Time
15:41 15:41
( 12 %)
8:52 24:33
(18%)
11:04 36:16
(27%)
North by Northwest: 1,700 IVlilGS in Nine Sequences
113
tension arises—can Roger rescue Eve? The Professor
persuades Roger to save Eve with ruse at Mount
Rushmore. Roger goes through with it. Whose
sequence? Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist. Roger. Objective: To help Eve through ruse.
Second CH-lmmafion: At mTport, Roger has the
mystery explained to him—-then is informed Eve s life
is in danger (1:38:16—74%).
H After their nioTuent alone together in the woods, Eve IS 10:45
taken away. Roger escapes from his hospital confines to (93%)
(>0 after her. He succeeds in sneaking into Vandamm s
house and speaking to her, but she is called away to the
airplane nonetheless. Un ifying Aspect. Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist. Roger. Objective: To rescue Eve.
1 Final climactic chase to Mount Rushmore, and the 9:51
ensuing battle thereon. Unifying Aspect Dramatic (lOO/o)
Tension. Protagonist Roger. Objective: To escape from
Vandamm with Eve.
Resolution: The battle on Mount Rushmore.
Epilogue: Roger and Eve on the Irairr, _
l^Qiji/rence of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission
115
Lawrence of Arabia; Sixteen
Sequences and an
Intermission
Beca>.se of its leogth, Umnce ofAnbi, stretches the limits of the dra-
mane fonu As first noted by Aristotle and reinforced by others, one
aspect that distmgmshes drama from the novel and other long narrative
orms js that jt is intended to be experienced in one sitting. This gives
the viewer a unified effect, a glimpse of the overall shape of the piece
t at IS harder to discern when a narrative is experienced in several in-
s ailments over the course of a longer time. At three hours and forty
minutes the picture stretches the limits of human endurance, and in a
hDurs° audience, an intermission is offered after two
Still, the picture retains a very rigorous three-act structure. Lawrence
IS on a quest to free the Arabs of Turkish rule. This is made dear a
quarter of foe way mto the picture, and readies an apparent resolution
three-quarters of the way through, before arriving at its true, tragic res¬
olution. The proportions of the acts remain the same: the finst ends an-
about 80O/O of the way through. The first cuJmination-the attack on
Aqaba— comes at the 48% mark.
To help convey the audience through a picture of this length, the use
of sequences is in evidence: sixteen in ail, running in length from eight
to seventeen minutes. It’s worth noting that even though the film and
jts acts are atypically long, the constituent sequences are not themselves
any longer than those found in shorter films. This speaks to the function
of sequences as opposed to acts; typical sequences are themselves short
three-act dramas that build upon one another in support of the overall
film, which usually has its larger three-act structure. As discussed in
Chapter 1, if sequences are too long, i.e., if a filmmaker attempts to use
one line of dramatic tension to sustain audience attention, for more than
twenty or so minutes, the effectiveness of the sequence is undermined.
The overall layout of the story of Lawrence of Arabia —a series of
journeys—lends itself readiLy to being broken up into sequences. Nine
of the sixteen sequences involve travel from one point to another; most
of the rest contain adventures at one particular location or another.
Only twice to do successive sequences occur in the same location.
Lawrence of Arabia is, from a storytelling viewpoint, a film obsessed
with the future. Perhaps, again, in a bow to its length, the storytellers
focus tremendous amounts of energ)^ and screen time on the task, of
making sure the audience is aware of where they are in the stor)^ what
lies ahead, what they should be aifaid of what they should hope for. It
is also exemplary in the attention given to making the entrances of char¬
acters memorable, and its use of contrasts—light and dark, sound and
sDence, dose-ups and long shots—to help punctuate the action.
Sequence A: Creating Curiosity, Launching the Journey
The opening sequence begins with the opening titles, where a man in
military uniform is shown from a high angle tinkering with a motorcy¬
cle. The odd angle creates a visual puzzle, and his actions provide tele¬
graphing: it can reasonably be deduced that he plans to ride the
motorcycle.
The man begins his journey as soon as the titles end, and the pu 22 le
of who he is remains, because the goggles obscure his face. He passes a
construction site with a sign that reads ''Warning” and ‘^Danger,” a
subtle foreshadowing, something of a visual dangling cause.
The man swerves to avoid some pedestrians and winds up in an acci¬
dent, where his death is implied indirect^—through the wreckage of
the motoTcyde and the goggles'hanging from a hush.
The film immediately switches to a statue of the man that identifies
him as T. E. Lawrence—again, the audience is given a glimpse of him,
but not a clear one, because he is represented only by the statue. The
— 114 —
116
SCREENWRITIIMG
music and costumes suggest a memorial service, and in the conversation
of those in attendance, several contradictory descriptions of the man are
shared: “extraordinary/’ “poet/' “scholar/' “mighty warrior/' “shame¬
less exhibitionist," “very great man/'
The memorial service scene ends with a dialogue hook—one man
remembering that Lawrence “had a minor function on his staff in
Cairo." The him immediately switches to the close-up of a hand hold¬
ing a paintbrush that belongs, it turns out, to Lawrence, whose location
is soon confirmed as Cairo. Shortly after this, after more than five min¬
utes of film, the audience is given its first unimpeded look at Lawrence.
These five minutes, then, provide the puzzle whose function is it to
hook the audience. The storytellers do not assume the audience knows
anything about the title character, or that they have any particular curi¬
osity about him. Instead, they go about creating curiosity about him
and retarding his true entrance until the anticipation is sufficiently
built up.
In the scene that follows, Lawrence expresses unhappiness with his
current position, displays knowledge of Arabic and awareness and con¬
cern for the Arab cause against the Turks, and finally exliibits certain
eccentricities—his indifference to pain (he showcases his habit of put¬
ting out matches with his bare fingers) and his overly formal, conde¬
scending manner of speaking. During the scene, Lawrence gets a
message and announces to those present he has an appointment with
the general. After Lawrence leaves for this appointment, the two re¬
maining soldiers exchange still two more opinions about him: he's
balmy, and he's “all right."
While en route to the general’s office, Lawrence walks through the
officers' mess, where he again displays a condescending attitude, in this
case toward a superior officer, and receives a rebuke in which the officer
proffers yet another description of him: a clown. Lawrence knocks over
a table and awkwardly apologizes.
The film now switches to General Murray’s office, where Dryden, a
friend of Lawi'ence's, is attempting to secure Lawrence an assignment in
Arabia. The scene makes masterful use of the “exposition as ammuni¬
tion" approach, but goes a step further; it features as many elements of
the future (dangling causes) as there are elements of the past (exposi¬
tion). The general describes Lawrence as an overweening, insubordinate
junior officer; gives his opinion that the campaign in the Middle East is
a sideshow to the war in Europe; and reveals that a Colonel Brighton
has already been sent out to Arabia. But most of the scene is pregnant
117
nfAmhia: Sixteen Sequences and a n Interm^^
with the future: Dryden telling the general that Lawrence naay be of use
to die Arab Bureau, that Lawrence would not be grying military advice.
Ihat as far as the Arab army is concerned, big things have small begin
nings General Murray in turn opines that time spent on the Be oum is
time wasted, but concedes that an expedition to Arabia might make a
man out of Lawrence, to the end, Dryden manages to secure an expedi¬
tion for Lawence of three months’ duration—a deadline that immedi-
atelv provides a time frame for the action.
4e importance of artilley^-paid off later in various ways-is also
planted mthe scene. Further, within the scene, the business about Law¬
rence’s salute is planted and paid off.
Afterward, Lawrence and Dryden confer, and here again the toture
figures prominently in the scene. Lawrence claims he s the man for the
2,. Di/den describes the job to him: find Prince Feisal and determme
his int/ntions, a dangling cause that is picked up in the following se
quence Lawrence replies with another dangling cause, in this case apr
Stion: “It’s going to be fun.” Dryden replies that only two creatures
think the desert is fun; Bedouins and gods, and that Lawrence is nei er.
This is a motif that is paid off-revisited-m many ways *ioughou
the film. Lawrence’s final retort is to insist that it is going to be tun,
dangling cause that hooks the setpuence into the nest one.
Sequence B: The Journey to the IVlasturah Wei!
An abrupt contrast-fiom a well-lit, interior close-up to an exterior
wide shot of the pietoawn desert—marks the transmon from the fi
to the second sequence. The sequence begins slowLy-two long shots
occupy over a minufe of screen time-but the extensive setup in the
first sequence is sufficient to create enough anticipation to allow for
Leisurely pace. The sequence mns seventeen minutes, unified by Law¬
rence’s obiective of finding Feisal. The obstacles involve the natural and
man-made challenges of the desert. An important aspect of the se¬
quence is Lawrence’s evoKdng relationship withTafas, his guide, and t e
beginning of Lawrence’s transformation into a Bedouin that this re
tionship marks. Along the way, .the inner S/o/
expressed through external meairis—the water, the camel-ridmg le ,
I awrence's gun, Tafes's shared meal-
In the first ^cene between Tafas md Lawrence, Tafas gives Lawrence
a chance to drink, which Lawrence declines when Tafas reveals he him-
11P;
SCREEl, WRITING
self is not drinking. This arouses Tafas's curiosity about Lawrence, and
is a payoff of Lawrence’s ability to endure pain, dramatized in the first
sequence.
The next dialogue scene occurs at night over a campfire, when Tafas
queries Lawrence about his background, attempting to satisfy his curi¬
osity about the man. At the end of the conversation, yet another opin¬
ion about Lawrence is expressed, this time his own appraisal; he’s
“different.”
Contrast is again used in the transition between scenes—a dark night
sky to the bright morning close-up of Lawrence’s gun. Lawrence offers
the gun to Tafas as a gift (initiating its use as a motif); Tafas makes a
counteroffer—he’ll accept it after he takes Lawrence to Lord Feisal. This
provides a reminder of the objective of the sequence. Lawrence insists,
and Tafas in return offers Lawrence some Bedouin food; the exchange
of props thus expresses a change in the relationship.
When the journey resumes, Tafas has the two stop at the edge of a
ridge and points out a Bedouin camp far in the distance—planting the
motif of Tafas’s very sharp vision, and a setup of danger ahead: he tells
Lawrence that henceforth they will be in Harith country, and that he is
not Harith. Lawrence here displays his knowledge of Arabian ways when
he identifies Tafas’s tribe simply by looking at the color of his headdress,
a knowledge that impresses Tafas and provides a further basis for a
closer relationship.
Afterward, Tafas gives Lawrence an impromptu camel-riding lesson,
leading to a pratfall, then tells Lawrence the rest of the day will be diffi¬
cult, but that tomorrow there will be good riding—another dangling
cause. In the following scene Tafas declares that the Masturah Wells are
a day’s ride, and Lord FeisaLs camp is one day beyond that—
telegraphing the plan for the next two days, and thus orienting the audi¬
ence as to where they are in the journey. Lawrence replies by urging his
camel onward, displaying how much he’s learned about camel riding
during the journey—thus paying off the lesson planted the scene before.
The two arrive at the Masturah Wells, where they take a drink and
rest, and where Tafas notes that the water does not taste good because
the Harith are a “dirty people.” A brief scene of preparation by contrast
follows, where Lawrence lies down near a bush and whistles a tune while
examining his compass (planting the prop that will become important
later), which lends the impression that the stay at the well wall be restful,
Lawrence’s relaxation is interrupted by Tafas, who noisily drops the
waterskin into the w^elk his eyes transfixed by someone approaching in
of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission _ ^
the far distance—a payoff of his keen eyesight established before- Law-
ence notes Tafas’s alarm, and asks whether or not he sees Turks. Both
Turks and the Harith have already been established as dangers, so the
suspense in the scene—drawn out by a tong scene of preparation (in
this case retardation)—is already in play and need not be explained.
After a long pause, Tafas identifies the intruder as a Bedouin, and
after a bit longer, goes for the gun Lawrence had given him—the first
payoff of the prop. Tafas is killed by the intruder, dramatizing the antag¬
onisms between the various tribes of Arabia first hinted at by lafas.
The intruder examines Tafas s body, then takes the gun its second
payoff_and introduces himself as Sherif All. He explains why he killed
Tafas (he was from a tribe prohibited from using the weU). As Sherif All
starts to go away, Lawrence attacks him verbally, in the process initiat¬
ing a dangling cause that -will be picked up and developed extensively
throughout the picture: he tells them that as long as the Arabs fight
against each other, they will remain a little people—greedy, barbarous,
and cruel. In addition to creating anticipation, and Laying out the task
Lawrence will face as he pursues his ultimate objective, this line of dia¬
logue is a motif that is paid off two sequences later in Lawrence s meet-
ing with Feisal,
Sherif All warns Lawrence that he wall die before finding Feisal’s
camp, and threatens to take aw'ay his compass, then ends the scene and
sequence with a dialogue hook; “God be with you, English.
Sequence C; The First Battle
The apparently negative resolution to the preHous sequence—Lawrence
does not get to Feisal~is reversed in the opening of Sequence C, when
we soon learn that Lawnence. now alone, has arrived at Feisal s canip
after all. The third sequence, which runs just under nine minutes, is
unified by an event—the introd-uction of Lord Feisal—as opposed to a
single line of dramatic tension. The first part of the sequence contains
Lawrence’s arrival at FeisaFs camp, the middle features the battle and
Lawrence’s encounter whth FeisaL, and the third portrays the retreat of
the Arabs as a consequence of the battle.
It’s arguable that Sequence B doesn’t end tOl Lawrence actually meets
Feisal, because that is truly a resolution to the dramatic question of the
sequence. But several changes occur after the first Lawrence-Ali scene
at the Masturah Wells that 1 think jiistifr such a demarcation. The tran-
120
SGREEMWRITING
sition between the Masturah Wells and Lawrence's arrival at Wadi Safra
is marked by three major changes: in cast (Lawrence loses Tafas, a com¬
panion from the outset of sequence Bj and gains new ones—Colonel
Brighton, Feisaf and FeisaLs men), in location (open desert to the rug¬
ged terrain of Wadi Safra), and action (the lonely sojourn ends, and a
battle against the Turks ensues). These changes, and the unhurried pace
of Lawrence’s approach to Wadi Safra, signal a new segment of the
movie has begun.
Sequence C begins with a brief scene of preparation by contrast, with
Lavvi'ence singing as he approaches Wadi Safra (the same song he’d been
whistling before encountering Sherif Ali), which gives impression of a
leisurely journey ahead—an expectation abruptly reversed with the ap¬
pearance of Colonel Brighton, whose presence with Feisal has already
been established several times in the dialogue of the first two sequences.
Brighton confronts Lawrence, finds out about his mission (‘"appreci¬
ate the situation”), and then orders him to keep his mouth shut, and to
make his appreciation and leave—two dangling causes picked up and
developed in Sequence D.
Their conversation is interrupted by the arrival of two Turkish air¬
craft that launch a raid and initiate the first of three battle scenes fea¬
tured in the picture. The attack leads to the memorable introduction of
one of the major characters, Prince Feisal, who tries to charge the air¬
craft on horseback, then encounters Lawrence in a billow of smoke. This
encounter closes off the dangling cause uttered by Dryden in the first
sequence, namely his instructions to Lawrence to find Feisal.
At this encounter, Colonel Brighton urges Feisal to retreat south, and
Feisal agrees—a dangling cause that knits the scene to the next, which
portrays the nighttime retreat of the Arabs. At the end of the scene, Fei¬
sal makes reference to the guns—artillery—of the Turks, the first payoff
of this issue, planted in the scene with General Murray.
The retreat provides an opportunity for the memorable introduction
of two more characters, Daud and Farraj, who ask Lawrence for ciga¬
rettes, then later offering to be his servants^ Lawrence declines, but tire
request is a motif paid off two sequences later, when Lawrence does in¬
deed hire the two.
Sequence D: Feisal’s Tent
The fourth sequence runs fourteen minutes and is unified by dramatic
tension: Lawrence’s desire to solve the military difficulty the Arabs are
l^wr ence of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an lotermission
121
bandog. The ‘‘first act” of the sequence finds Lawrence and Col. Brigh¬
ton in FeisaLs tent, where passages from the Koran are being recited,
pramatically, Brighton is the protagonist of the scene—it is shaped by
bis desire to persuade Feisal to retreat further south and accept British
training and command. LawTence is die unexpected obstacle to Brigh¬
ton, disagreeing on tactics (thus picking up a dangling cause from the
first and third sequences: Dryden’s assurance that Lawrence will not
aive any military advice, echoing Brighton’s similar admonition).
Feisal suggests his men could be supplied through the port of
—planting a very important motif that is paid off during the fol¬
lowing two sequences. There follows “exposition through ammuni¬
tion,” during which it is revealed that Aqaba cannot be taken from the
sea because it has twelve-inch guns. The verbal motif of artillery is paid
off again, as Feisal requests it and Brighton refuses.
The scene ends with an apparent victory for Brighton, though Feisal
indicates he will not give his final decision dll the morning—a dangling
cause. Fie then gestures for Lawrence to remain behind. Here, Feisal lays
out his ov\Ti dilemma—the need for help from the British, and his fear
of British domination. He questions Lawrence’s loyalties—furthering
the motif of Lawrences ambivalent identity. Feisal then recounts the
former glories of the Arabs, provoking a dangling cause from Lawrence:
“Time to be great again.” The scene ends with a dangling cause that
inidates a verbal motif of considerable significance during the following
two sequences: “We need a miracle.”
Thus ends the “sequence first act ” and, further, the setup for the
rest of the movie: the goal is laid out~a return to greatness for the
Arabs—as are the obstacles—the Turks, British, and lack of artillery.
Lawrence exits the tent into a rising wind that had already become audi¬
ble in the scene with Feisal.
After a brief aftermath scene with Feisal alone in the tent, which
serves to signal the importance of both what has just happened and
what is about to happen, Lawrence sets out for the surrounding desert
where he becomes lost in thought. Here, tlie challenge of dramatizing
physically an inner state—deep meditation—is met by intensifying the
atmosphere (desert winds, darkness, then eventually light again), by the
use of music {a gradually ascending scale, increasing volume, and in-
strumentatio n), and throii gh the reaction of Tar aj and D and, wh o watch
him intently throughout the night.
The culmination of the sequence occurs when Lawrence declares:
“Aqaba. From the land.” The rest of the sequence involves Lawence
122
SCREENWRlTrNG
tr)dng to peisuade Sherif Ali to go along with his plan to seize Aqaba
More exposition is handled through their argument: going to Aqaba will
require crossing the Nehid desert, which is impossible; Lawrence wants
just fifty men; the Howeitat tribe, who are good fighters, are on the op¬
posite side of the Nefnd. During the conversation, Lawrence makes a
prediction, if fifty men come out of the Nefud, they may be joined by
others, and his last line in the scene is a forceful dialogue hook that
binds it to the next sequence: ''Aqaba is over there. It is only a matter
of going.
Sequence E: Crossing The Nefud
The resolution of the previous scene actually occurs in the opening of
this sequence, the question is whether or not Lawrence can persuade
Sherif Ali to go along with him to Aqaba, and as Sequence E begins,
with Lawrence and others making preparations for departure, the out¬
come is revealed: Lawrence has succeeded.
With the commencement of the journey to Aqaba, the second act of
the movie as a whole begins. It is by now amply dear who the protago¬
nist is, what he wants (to help make the Arabs great again—free of the
yoke of both the Turks and British), and what the obstacles are (Turkish
forces and British intentions), The seizure of Aqaba will be the first step¬
ping-stone in achieving that goal.
Before Lawrence mounts up, Feisal confronts him and asks where he
is going with fifty of his men; Lawrence replies "To work your miracle”:
a payoff of Feisal s line the night before, and a dangling cause that will
inform the next three sequences. Feisal replies with a warning: "Blas¬
phemy is a bad beginning for such a journe/—another line pregnant
with the future. Lawrence^s promise to deliver a miracle—which Feisal
had described as something no man can deliver—and FeisaFs rebuke-
picks up on a motif initiated by Dryden's remark in the opening sequenccT
that Lawrence is neither god nor Bedouin. This motif—Lawrence as
god plays a major role in the next three sequences, extending through
the conquest of Aqaba and his journey through Sinai.
As the journey begins, the storytellers employ a tool used seldom in
the picture-^dramatic irony. The two boys, Farraj and Daud, follow
Lawrence and his men into the desert and spy on them at the oasis be¬
fore the moment of recognition; they are caught by Gasim. They are
i^wrence of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Interinission
123
brought to Sherif Ali and Lawrence, where they claim their camels
strayed and led them to the camp in order to serve Lawrence—evidence,
they say, of the will of Allah. This, and Sherif All’s description of the two
as worshippers (while they lie prostrate at Lawrence's feet), and Gasim’s
reference to Allah afterward, all help embroider the scene with the
“god” motif. The scene also has two dangling causes—Sherif Aii’s warn¬
ing that the two boys are not suitable for the journey, and Gasim’s pre¬
diction that the two will bring luck to Lawrence, Another motif is also
planted—Gasim's statement to Lawrence that the two boys are parent¬
less and therefore outcasts, paid off two sequences later when Lawrence
reveals himself to be of illegitimate birth.
The end of the "first act” of this sixteen-minute sequence occurs five
minutes into it, when Lawrence and his men arrive on a ridge overlook¬
ing the Nefud Desert, The scene is fraught ^vith gloomy elements of the
future uttered by Sherif Ali: if the camels die, the men will die, and after
twenty days the camels will start to die. The rest of the journey through
the Nefud is punctuated by pauses in which new elements of the future
are introduced, keeping the audience constantly apprised about the
progress they are making and what lies ahead.
The party is shown proceeding through the desert vastness, from a
distance that emphasizes how few and small the group is—a subtle vi-
suaJ motif paid off later when these men join up with Auda s men on
the far side. During this first pari of the desert journey, Lawrence spots
t\vo dust columns in the distance, vaguely reminiscent of tire pillar of
fire that led Moses through the desert; a subtle reference to the ‘"god”
motif. In viewing them, lawience "drifts^' a plant paid oft later when a
rider falls off his camel, and later still when Gasim disappears for the
Same reason. After Sherif Ali rebukes Lawrence for drifting Lawrence
replies with a dangling cause: an assurance that it won't happen again.
This rebuke and rebuttal carries on another aspect of this sequence and
those surrounding it: the antagonism between Sherif Ali and Lawence,
The bitterness of their antag-pnism is reinforced daring the next
scene, when Lawrence is shaving at a campsite and Ali accuses him of
Wasting water. Ali telegraphs the next phase of the journey: it will take
place at night, and they will leave in three hours; Lawrence replies that
he']] be the one to awaken Ali. •
This exchange sets upthe folloieing two scenes, the first of their night
journey, and the next of a daytime campsite, where the camels and men
are eerily still in the bright sun. After this, Lawrence and Ali pause in a
rock-strewn stretch of desert, ivhere Lawrence takes a drink of water
and dearly showing strain, He asks All if they rest where they are- Ah
tells him there is no rest until they cross the next part of the desert-th
Sun s Anvih which must be done before the sun comes up the ne^
day-an urgent deadline that informs the rest of the sequencr ^
an d”n "'ghttime phase of the journey, Baud falls off his camel
and quickly regains it. Soon afterward, the far side of the Anviff
reached, and a positive resolution of the sequence is at hand 1 aw *
declares. ‘^WeVe done iti» and thanks God L th the L'hi^
how much he has tempted God-another embroidery of the god moth
Lawrence asks Ali how far it is to the wells; All tells Wm by noon t W
g.vmg the time frame for the next phase of the journey. ’
Sequence F: The Rescue of Gasim
As soon as the reality of their triumph sinks in. Baud notices that Gasim
ining in the saddle. The momentary elation at crossing the Nef„d
.od *7,7777777777^^
77:777 l' g7”.
.* din, de7;r»
through
••it7wri7' “T 7“ 7"“ ‘'™ '>»■' wing
written —planting a phrase that continues the "god” motif Th!
make it to Aqaba, and Lawrence’s reply that he will.
the handling of the ‘second acL’ of the secinenr^’_it. t i
^t^AlTlLf " ^hown but ato t'X
-3 withheU from view. Gasim stumbles alone through th desert
watches from his camel, Lawrence makes his way alone
kpses, dl this while the rest of the party refreshes iLlf at the watering
hole and Farraj watches for a sign of Lawence What’s m,n.w ■ L
sce^ne m which Lawrence actuaUy finds Gasim and hoists hi o" th!
ofArai^/^: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission 125
The omission of this scene seems to serve two purposes. First, it
4iows for the milking of a certain amount of suspense—if we see Law¬
rence effect the rescue, we cannot experience the doubt that Daud feels
as he keeps an eye out. Second, it allows the sequence to have one cli-
inactic moment rather than two. Given the importance of the relation¬
ship between Lawrence and Ali, the stor)d;eLlers have put the emphasis
on Lawrence's triumphal return and his reconciliation with Ali, rather
than his rescue of Gasim, a minor character.
Lawrence's initial encounter with Daud does provide some moments
of exhilaration, but it's sufficiently close enough to the reconciliation
with Ali as to be part of the buildup to that moment. In fact, having
both of the boys watching for Lawrence, in different locations, allows
for the exploitation of dramatic irony. Daud’s encounter with Lawrence
provides a scene of revelation w^hose spawned irony enriches the emo¬
tional impact of Farraj’s anxious waiting and Ali’s evident discourage¬
ment.
Lawrence s return on camelback, feted by the men, each of whom
offers him a place to stay, is reminiscent of Jesus’ entry into Jerusalem—
another subtle payoff of the motif. Lawi'ence greets Ali by accept¬
ing a drink from his rvaterskin, and tells him '^nothing is -written"—yet
another payoff of the line. He then accepts AJLs bed after teLing Farraj
to wash his clothes. Lawrence’s subsequent coLapse provides the mo¬
ment of aftermath.
In the epilogue of the sequence, later that night, Ali and Lawrence
have a conversation that dramatizes the transformatioTi of Alt’s relation¬
ship with him^ from bitter rival and antagonist to true admirer. After
Lawrence speaks of his background, he falls asleep again, and Ali takes
advantage of the occasion to bum La-wrence's clothes that are hanging
to dry.
Sequence G: Recruiting Auda Abu Tayi
The sharp contrast of night and day marks the transition between the
sixth and seventh sequences of the picture. Ali presents Lav-nence with
the white robes of an .^ab sherif, and the external evidence of Law-
rence^s internal transformalion from British officer to Arab is delivered
forcefully. Any awkwardness in his manner (conveyed both by Peter
OTooleh acting choices and by the costume designer who intentionally
126
SCREENWRfTiNG
provided him with an ilJ-fitting uniform) vanishes in his flowing, natu^
ral movements in the new garb.
Lawrence rides a camel around a hill away from the encampment in
order to try out his new outfit, and here he encounters another major
character—Auda Abu Tayi—chief of the Howeitat tribe. This encounter
marks the end of the “first act” of this fifteen-minute sequence, which
is unified by Lawrence’s efforts to secure Auda’s help in attacking
Aqaba. As such, it picks up a dangling cause from the end of Sequence
E Lawrence s prediction that if they can succeed in getting through
the Nefud, they may be joined by others.
In order to secure Auda’s cooperation, Lawrence utilizes indirection.
Auda complains about the thugs drinking from his well; as soon as Law¬
rence realizes who he is talking to, he compares Auda to another man
of that name who would not begrudge water to men who had come out
of the Nefud Desert. During most of the rest of the scene, Lawrence uses
such indirect means, primarily flattery, to persuade Auda to cooperate,
Auda summons his son and the two proceed to the well to confi'ont
the rest of Lawrence’s party, Ali and Auda exchange insults before Law¬
rence stops them and, again, uses indirection; “What are you teaching
[your son] today—Howeitat hospitality?” Auda backs off, and the scene
ends with his line; “It is my pleasure that you dine with me at Wadi
Rumm.’’Jhis dialogue plants a verbal motif {Auda’s phrase “It is my
pleasure ) and senfes as a dialogue hook into the next image, which is
of Wadi Rumm, portrayed in a long shot that shows the great size of
Auda's tribe.
The scope of Auda’s power is reinforced by the scene that follows,
where Lawrence s party is dwarfed by the number of men who come
out to greet them in a swirl of dust, pounding hooves, shouting, and
gunfire.
Contrast is employed in the transition to the next scene _from
brightness, noise, and action to a quiet interior close-up of a girl's face.
The scene finds Lawrence, Alt, and Auda finishing a meal in Auda’s tent.
The thrust of the scene is dramatic—Lawrence wants to persuade Auda
to join them against Aqaba. Lawrence manipulates him by appealing to
bis ego—calling him a servant—and to his greed—his desire for money.
In the end, he wins Auda over by persuading him that much money can
be had m Aqaba, yet closes the deal by again using flattery, telling Auda
he will join them because it is Auda’s pleasure—the second payoff of
the line.
/^wr ence ofAraiJi^: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission
Sequence H: The Attack on Aqaba
127
Xhis dangling cause knits Sequence G to Sequence H, which opens with
Lawrence's and Auda’s men setting off for Aqaba. The previous se¬
quence i-S thus shown to have a positive resolution—Lawrence has per¬
suaded Auda to join them. Sequence H, which runs just under sixteen
minutes, is centered on the seizure of Aqaba: the approach marks the
first act of the sequence, the battle itself is the second, and the aftermath
is the third.
The mighty procession that proceeds from Wadi Rumm stands in
remarkable visual contrast to the small band that was sho\^m setting out
across the Nefud, They arrive at an encampment overlooking the port
of Aqaba. Here, Lawrence and Ali exchange words in a scene of prepara¬
tion by contrast that also reinforces dangling causes already in force. Ali
predicts they will take Aqaba tomorrow—^/'Lawrence is right about the
guns. The upbeat mood is interrupted by a gunshot, which in turn leads
to a crisis.
Lawrence and Ali investigate and discover that one of All’s men
killed one of Auda’s. With the mission in danger of failing apart over a
blood feud, Lawrence offers to be the executioner. He takes hold of Ali s
gun—which is actually his own gun, planted several sequences before—
and aims the gun at the murdereiq who proves to be none other than
Gasim, the man he’d rescued from the desert. Lawrence carries out the
execution, and in a bitter aftermath, Auda remarks that it was written—
the last payoff of the line.
Lawrence, distraught over his action, throws away the gun in a brief
aftermath scene before the scene switches to Aqaba, where the attack
begins. This is the second of the battle scenes, and is larger, longer, and
more elaborate than the previous one, and ends with the image of two
large guns facing out to sea, paying off the motif planted in Sequence
D. It’s worth noting that the battle for Aqaba occurs one hour and forty
minutes into the film—the place where one might normally find a cli¬
mactic scene in a film of more typical length. In this, the storytellers
manage to accommodate the audience’s conditioned expectations while
stretching their attention beyond its normal limit.
An aftermath scene follows the attack—Lawence at the ocean look¬
ing quietly out at the crashing waves. Soon Ali arrives to present him
with a victor's laurels and congratulate him. The moment marks the
first culmination of the picture: Lawrence is triumphant and his rela¬
tionship with All is veiy dose—the mirror opposite of the second cul-
mination of the film. Ali tells him: ‘'tribute for the prince^ flowers foj>
tlie man”—two more opinions about Lawrence.
Their conversation is interrupted by gunfire in Aqaba, where Auda
is furious that he has not found the gold he'd been promised. Lawrence
arrives after the telegraph has been smashed, and during the rest of the
sequence, he is preoccupied with getting word back to Cairo about the
victory, and quelling Auda's rage. He first instructs Ali to have Feisal
bring the Arab army to Aqaba—a dangling cause picked up after tlie
intermission—and tells Ali he plans to go to Cairo himself across
Sinai—an appointment realized in the following sequence. Ali objects
predicting that Lawrence will take off his ‘Tunny” Arab clothes and put
on trousers when he gets to Cairo so that he’ll be taken seriously, an¬
other dangling cause.
Auda interrupts with the accusation that Lawrence lied about gold
in Aqaba. Lawrence solves tire problem by making a promise—he will
bring back gold and guns—and sets a deadline for this—ten days. Auda
voices skepticism about Lawrence being able to cross Sinai with Farraj
and Daud, and Lawrence retorts: ‘‘Moses did.” This introduces a varia¬
tion on the “god” motif—this time Lawrence as prophet.
Sequence I: Across Sinai
This sequence, at eleven and a half minutes, is unified by the journey
across Sinai and ends with LawenceT announcement of his seizure of
Aqaba in Cairo. Lawrence’s intent, and his plan, are ali explained in the
previous sequence, so the action begins immediately with Lawrence and
the two boys en route. Farraj, obwously exhausted, asks if they can stop
and rest; La-wrence replies with a line that reinforces the purpose of the
sequence: “There will be no rest till they know I have Aqaba.” He then
promises that by “tomorrow night” they will sleep in the finest beds in
the finest hotel in Cairo—a dangling cause that also sets a deadline for
the Journey. Baud’s reply: “Then it shall be so. Lord,” is yet another
reinforcement of the “god” motif.
In the next scene, Lawrence points out a dust storm in the distance
and calls it a “pillar of fire,” carrying this motif one Instance more. The
party is soon overtaken by a dust storm that claims Lawrence’s coin-
pass—the last payoff for the object. Lawrence announces they need only
head due west, into the setting sun—and will eventually strike the canal-
This amounts to an updated agenda that maintains the audience’s sense
/irabia; Sixteen Sequencgs_andjn Intermissiw-
ijMenciSJl -
W-both time and space-^m the sequence, As they ride west,
ofgeography Daud Ms into a
'"‘TLd d(es, despite Lawrence’s efforts to save him, The disaster
qi,icLsand aftermath scene that actually carries over into e
" seine which finds Farraj nding a camel, following Lawrence,
tbllowing scene,
and a few more that follow, the costume department
To work in a way that enhances the script, because
® made to resemble Jesus, transformed from the prophet Moses
''T a his people to the suffering servant bearing a terrible burdem
A ’T tf o Tive at a cluster of buildings, Farraj leaves Lawence
behind and arrival of the two at the canal, which is
"'"““VbTa o”! L,w„.«.nr Fa^j
enounced ) doses off the Oanglmg cause of the
einerge o having Farraj discover the canal offscreen
fftto brin?~
first, then brmg experience of an impoi-Uat moment so
Tpped, but such a telling of the tale would have diminished the emo¬
tional impact of the scene. Rritkh officer on
AS tawtence and Fanaj look out ove, the ^
a motorcycle on the far Side stops and mice asks, Who are you.
Figure 13. Lawrence loses his servant Daud in a
I Of Lawrence of Arsius (1962). Compare this aftermath scBne^to thm
shown in Figure 10. Lawrence stretches the Fmits Q , m ^ tools to
because of its length, and makes lavish use of ail the storytelling tools to
ttie audience involved. (Frame enlargement)
130
SCREENWRITING
Lawrence of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission
131
question, posed as it is with the camera lingering on Lawrence^ is yet
another variation on the issue of Lawrence's identity.
With the journey across Sinai complete, the last four minutes of the
sequence involve Lawrence's arrival in Cairo and his announcement
about taking Aqaba. Lawrence and Farraj arrive at military headquar¬
ters, where they venture into the officers' club. A military policeman
guarding the entrance warns him not to take Farraj inside, exposition
about the rules of the bar that create tension in the scene that follows.
Lawrence proceeds to the bar and orders two glasses of lemonade,
creating a stir among the men. Brighton arrives, and Lawrence tells him
the news: he and the Arabs have taken Aqaba. Brighton tells him he’d
better talk to General Allenby—an appointment that helps to hook the
sequence into the next one. Lawrence then asks Brighton to get a room
with a bed—for Farraj—closing off the dangling cause of the first scene
in the sequence, and the two proceed out of the room. Brighton suggests
that Lawrence get some trousers on—a payoff of All’s line in the previ¬
ous sequence, and a dialogue hook into the next sequence.
Sequence J: The First Meeting With Allenby
The tenth sequence, which runs twelve minutes, is the first one in which
a character other than Lawrence serves as the protagonist. Here, the ob¬
jective of a new character, General Allenby, drives the action: that of
tiqdng to persuade Lawrence to go hack into the desert.
The sequence opens with Lawrence in Allenb/s office, still in his Ar¬
abic clothing (which effectively closes off the “trousers” dangling cause)
where he meets with General Allenby, Dryden, and Brighton. Allenby
reviews his dossier, then questions Lawrence about the seizure of Aqaba.
In the course of the conversation, Lavcrence begins to give military ad¬
vice—again picking up the dangling cause initiated by General Murray
in the opening sequence of the picture. Allenby promotes Lawrence
major, and tells him he wants him to go back. Lawrence resists, confess¬
ing his distress/thrill at killing Gasim, and his feeling that he is not fit
for the job. At this, the end of the “first act” of the sequence is at hand:
Allenby must try to persuade a reluctant Lawrence to go back into ac¬
tion.
Allenby’s approach is not unlike that which Lawrence used on
Auda—massage his ego. He hrst asks those present for their opinions
of Lawrence’s actions, which are very favorable. The four then proceed
for a drink at the officers’ bar; along the way Allenby continues to ask
Lawrence for military advice—another form of flattery. During the
course of the walk, Lawrence is visibly changed—more at ease.
The four take their place in the courtyard, and the conversation turns
to the future. Lawrence idls how he will take his men and smash the
railroads—a dangling cause—and even sets a deadline—thirteen weeks
to bring Arabia to chaos, Allenby asks if this means Lawrence is going
back, and Lawrence confirms thiS'—resolving the tension of the se¬
quence. The remainder of the sequence involves establishing a series of
dangling causes that will help knit the first part of the movie to the sec¬
ond—made more emphatic by the intermission that separates this se¬
quence from the next. Among these is the question of whether the Arabs
will be allowed to control Arabia if the Turks are defeated, an issue that
provides the dramatic tension of the third act of the picture.
In a brief scene afterward, Allenby reveals he won’t be giving Law¬
rence the held artillery after all—another payoff of the issue of artillery.
The sequence ends with one last dangling cause—Allenby observing
that Lawrence is “riding the whirlwind,” and Dryden replying, “Let’s
hope we’re not.”
Intermission
The intermission occurs after two hours and hvelve minutes of him. It
is thus not halfway through (it’s about 62% of the way through the him)
but rather occurs after the length of a typical feature him, The major
event of the hrst part of the him—the attack on Aqaba—occurs an hour
and a half in, the place where a typical “climax” of a regular length fea¬
ture would occur, The journey across Sinai would amount to the third
act of a regular feature, with Lawrence’s meeting with Allenby an op¬
portunity for an epilogue.
In fact, that last sequence is used to create the dangling causes that
will knit the hrst part of the movie to the second, where the focus of the
action will be along tv \'0 lines outlined in that last scene: the attack on
the Turkish railroads, and the freeing of the Arabs from both the Turks
and their would-be new conquerors, the British.
Sequence K: Jackson Bentley’s Scoop
For the second time in as many sequences, a newly introduced charac¬
ter, this time Jackson Bentley, selves as the protagonist. He is the hrst
132 _ SCREENWRITING
character to appear after the intermission, ascending a hill overlooking
the Gulf of Aqaba. An armored car passes by him—paying off Law¬
rence's request for the vehicles in the previous sequence.
Bentley asks Selim, Feisal’s reciter, for directions to Prince FeisaJ; his
business card provides a visual bridge between that scene and the one
following it, in which Bentley meets Feisal. The card also initiates expo¬
sition about Bentley; he is a reporter for the Chicago Courier. Feisal in¬
vites Bentley inside and places a watch on a table—a subtle, visual
deadline for the scene—then reveals that he does not know where Law¬
rence—and his army—are, though he offers a guess. Bentley raises the
issue of the Arabs' lack of artillery and warns Feisal about Allenby, who
is untrustworthy—a dangling cause that, combined with the lack of ar¬
tillery, raises again the issue of independence of the Arabs from British
rule. Bentley then reveals his purpose—^he wants to tell the story of Law-
rence and the Arab revolt. This desire provides the primary tension of
the thirteen-minute sequence.
Feisal gets up after checking his watch, signaling the deadline has
been reached, then tells Bentley his army is destroying the Turkish rail¬
road, providing exposition to the audience, in this case what has oc¬
curred during the intermission. Feisal also tells him that his army does
not allow its wounded to be captured by the Turks, who wdl torture
them. This motif is paid off later when Farraj is wounded. Bentley raises
the issue of Lawrence's reputed horror at bloodshed; Feisal poses a
question about how reliable Lawence is as to mercy—a dangling cause
picked up in the third act,
The scene ends with Bentley admitting he is looking for a romantic
figure who will help persuade America to enter the war; Feisal replies:
“Lawrence is your man.’' This is a dialogue hook into the following
scene, which finds Lawrence blowing up a Turkish train. The end of the
“first act” of the sequence is thus accomplished; its protagonist, Bentley,
has been introduced; his objective has been explained, as have the obsta¬
cles.
Lawrence sets off an explosive charge that derails the train; the Arabs
pour gunfire into the train till Lawrence stops them (a subtle payoff of
the “mercy” issue raised by Feisal), then leads a charge. After the Arabs
begin to pillage the train, Lawrence is wounded by a surviving Turkish
soldier. The close brush ^vith death only serves, to embolden Lawrence,
a return to the ''god” motif Lawrence malces a triurnphant walk along
the top of the train to the adoring cheers of his men, and the ready
camera of Bentley. The manner in which he moves is a payoff of a visual
of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Irterpnission _ 133
^otif planted in an earlier scene when he practiced flowing movements
with his Arab garments just prior to meeting Auda.
With the attack on the train over, Colonel Brighton raises an issue
and a dangling cause—when he criticizes the Arabs for looting, then
going home. He warns Ali it must stop. Lawrence insists they will come
back; Ali warns him “not this year.”
The next scene finds Bentley examining a British children’s book ex¬
plaining how Parliament works; he asks Ali skeptically if the Arabs will
become a democracy, Ali replies that he will answer the question when
he has a country— keeping alive the “Arabia is for the Arabs now” ver¬
bal motif
Bentley carries this motif further in the next .scene when he asks Law¬
rence what the Arabs hope to gain from the fight; Lawrence replies:
‘Their freedom,” and says he is going to give it to them, Bentley an¬
nounces he wilt be returning to the “fleshpots” shortly, an appointment
that signals his departure.
The sequence ends with Auda telling Brighton the year is running
out and that he must find something “honorable”— meaning loot—^to
bring home with him. This dialogue hook binds Sequence K to the next
one, which opens with a shot of beautiful horses on a train, lingering
on one white steed in particular.
Sequence L; The Campaign Falters
The twelfth sequence of the picture, which runs ten minutes, is unified
by Lawrence's attempt to keep the campaign going despite the gradual
desertion of most of his men ■'ivith the onset of winter, It opens with
another attack on a Turkish train. This time, Farraj is seen putting away
the explosive equipment, planting a motif to be paid off later in the
sequence.
The Arabs storm the train and make off-with its load of horses. Auda
chooses the white one for his own and rides up to Lawrence to bid him
fareweU, for he has his prize—dosing off the dangling cause of the end
of the previous sequence. Colonel Brighton asks Lawrence what he in¬
tends to do now—without an army. Lawence telegraphs his plans: he'll
go north, because that is what Alenby wants, Brighton replies that Al-
lenby wanted the Arab army behind the town of Deraa; Lawrence re¬
torts 'with a dangling cause—^he will be in Deraa before Allen.b'^^ teaches
Jerusalem.
In the following scene, Lawrence and his men are preparinc, anon,
attack on a train. Farraj injures himself while helping to set the cha ■
and, m a payoff of Peisal’s earlier expo.sition about not leaving wounf
behind, Lawrence is once again forced to be the executioner
The sequence ends with a dangling cause that binds it to the n
one: Air asking Lawrence what he will do now, with only twenty m"’"'
and Lawrence replying, "Til go north.” ^
Sequence IVI: Disaster in Deraa
The final sequence of the second act begins with a recapitulation
scene—Colonel Brighton and General Allenby discussing the pros,
ress—or lack thereof—of Lawence’s campaign. The question of Law.
1 ence s identity is again raised, with Allenby asking Brighton if he thinks
pwrence has “gone native,” and later wondering if Lawrence thinks
he s a prophet. Allenby discloses that the Turks have put a reward of
20,000 pounds on Lawrence’s head, and proffers a dangling cause-
doubting that Lawrence has long to live. The scene ends with Allenby
yking about next year—will Lawrence and his Arab army come
back?—another dangling cause.
The scene now shifts to a desolate, wintiy encampment—a stunning
visual contrast to the quiet, comfortable quarters of General Allenby.
1 tries to persuade Lawrence to go easier on the men— using another
dangling cause; one more failure and Lawrence will be alone In his ar¬
gument, Ah revives the “god” motif-chiding Lawrence that for him
the men must wallc on water. Lawrence replies in kind, asking Ali “Do
you think Tm just any man?”
Lawence continues the motif when he enters the next chamber and
asks the men, "Who will walk on water with me?” He asks who will
accompany him into the town of Deraa, explaining that he promised
the Engiiy generals he would be there before the English seized Jerusa¬
lem—picking up on a dangling cause of two sequences before. When
the Arabs balk, Lawrence telegraphs his intent: “This afternoon I will
take the Arab revolt into Deraa,” Majid replies with a dangling cause:
you pass for an Arab in an Arab town?”
At this point, just under four minutes into the fifteen-minute se¬
quence, its dramatic tension is established—Lawrence will lead a revolt
m the town of Deraa, and will have to overcome the obstacles of too
tew men and the fact that he’s not an Arab. Lawuence arrives in Deraa
of A ra-t) /a' Sixteen Sequences and an Intermission
puddle (^walking on water”—^the second pay-
in yisual form) after almost being run over by
in the back seat of a motor car.
a pa/off of Majid’s warning about not being able to pass for an
^rab Lawrence is immediately noticed by some Turkish soldiers, who
seiz:e him- He is brought to the office of the Bey, who selects him among
several young men brought in, This is one of the few scenes in the pic¬
ture whose emotional intensity is centered on dramatic irony—the au¬
dience’s secret knowledge that the Turk has captured a man who is none
othei' than Lawrence of Arabia, who carries a big price on his head. The
intensity of the tension reaches its climax when the Bey dismisses ah the
other men and begins closely questioning Lawrence^ describing his own
nriseiy at being assigned to Deraa, then eyeing Lawrence closely and
proclaiming, "'No, tAat would be too lucky,” a subtle reference to the
fact that Lawrence has a price on his head, and the nearest Lawrence
comes to having his identity revealed.
The Bey strips Lawrence and touches him while making a subtle sex¬
ual reference, inspiring Lawence to punch him. The Bey responds by
ordering him beaten, and Lawrence endures it, in a distant echo of his
comments about enduring pain in the opening sequence of the picture.
After the ordeal, Lawrence is dumped into the muddy street (the
final payoif of the 'Valk on water” line), and Ali comes to his aid. The
retreat that follows closes off the dangling cause uttered by Ali earlier
about the danger of one more failure. It also marks the beginning of the
'Third act” of the sequence; Lawence has failed to achieve his objective,
and the consequences are explored.
Over the course of Avo night scenes, Lawrence remains in shock as
Ali tries to nurse him back to health, telling him ''You have a body, like
other men”—a payoff of Lawrence’s claim that he is not just any man,
When Lawrence awakens in the third scene, the audience is given a
glimpse of a plausible outcome of the film—the failure of the Arab re¬
volt, He announces he is goings that he has come to the end of himself
In a reversal of his previous daim of not being just any man, he de¬
scribes himself as just that; 'Any man.” He telegraphs his intent; to go
to Jerusalem by easy stages^ and then to And a job that any man can do.
Lawrence asks All if he can borrow his thick coat; lAli objects that it is
''not dean”—the second piyoff of Lawrencek Line to Bentley about the
desert being clean.
The ‘'god” motif has come to a crashing end, as has Lawrence s am¬
bivalent identity of Englishman versus Arab. Lawence is disillusioned.
promptly ^
L of the line, this time
. 1 ,. Turkish Bey, who is
136
screenwriting
and the movie is apparently over, This emotional '‘low point” marls
the end of the second act. Lawrence, whose quest was to free the Arabs
from Turkish and British control, has failed. He tells Ali and the re^
maining Arabs to trust only their own people, and to let him go back to
his—a dialogue hook that knits tlie sequence (and act) to the next.
Sequence N: Lawrence Attempts to Resign
A British military parade, playing Western martial music, marks the
transition to the third act, and reinforces the notion that Lawrence has
now gone back to his own people and culture. He arrives at Allenby’s
headquarters, moving awkwardly again in his British uniform, and tries
to chat casually with fellow officers, who secretly express the feeling that
he is overdoing his attempts at camaraderie.
Character Arc
This phrase refers to the transformation a character can go through
in the course of a drama, and is understood as the conflict between
what a character wants and what the character needs. The character
is aware of his or her want, but unaware of his or her need until the
culmination of the character's story, Often, the character arc of the
protagonist carries the main theme of the picture.
Although Lawrence is a complex character, in general his con¬
scious desire is to emulate the gods and change history; his uncon¬
scious need is to realize that he is human and thus has limits. This
realization occurs to him at the end of the second act, after his fail¬
ure in Deraa. In Toy Story, (see Chapter 2), Woody's conscious de¬
sire is to maintain his place as Andy's most beloved toy; his i
unconscious need is to realize that he cannot will love. This revela¬
tion, too, occurs at the end of the second act.
Not all characters are capable of such transformation, and the
result can be tragic. In One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (Chapter
9), McMurphy is incapable of change—of shedding his basic sense
of humanity—and is crushed. In Being John MaJkovhh {see Chapter
11), Craig fs never able to overcome his obsession with Maxine and
so is condemned to be "absorbed."
Subplot characters can also have arcs and culminating transfor¬
mations; in this volume, notable among them are the Chief in Cuck¬
oo's Nest and Buzz in Toy Story.
arrives at Allenby’s of&ce just as Alleirby and DiTden are
"rnTa rne with Peisi after which Lawrence drscovers hat a
b"p • '‘“f®
rUnce. d™ in
Lawrence goes on *1 , a . ea , (be relaciveiy short
which is onthea by Lawrence's
' ™ r noh the Arab canrpigo. Alenby replies that he's matag ^
tcinp fr 1/i+L of next nnonth—appointment
f :tht „“w nt "'f
Utt pr,»“tis case and Ailenby, ahe, not.ng iha, Uwrenee Ira.
tnoney—they U come for him-
Sequence 0: The Drive to Damascus
This sequence, the second-last of the picture, is unified by Lawrence’s
ims sequence, drive to the same objec-
before .he Brr»b d. a„d ~h np » -
ernment free of .Mlied control. The issue ot Jurk
rendered irrelevant; rt fr aow the British Army that poses
''"in this vela, the opemngshot of
* u*hA xvaK rLd-ins. m front ot a laigc pc
ing-white Arab robes, ^ ^ “Damascus
being greeted by a cheering throng of Arabs. He sftou
138 _ screenwritin g
and leads his men onward, initiating a dangling cause that hooks into
the following scene. The narrative switches to a British command tent,
where Allenby confers with his staff on the progress of the offensive
toward Damascus. This amounts to a recapitulation scene (see text box,
page 29), with the various officers bringing the general (and the audi¬
ence) up-to-date on their situation, and one of them asking about the
Arab army noted on a map in front of them.
Allenby orders Colonel Brighton to make contact with the Arab
army to ascertain its whereabouts—initiating a dangling cause that is
suspended through the following scene—and the scene ends with an¬
other dialogue hook: Allenby pounding on the blackboard map and tell¬
ing one of his generals to ''pound them” with artillery.
The movie now dissolves to a long shot of flashes of artillery on a
distant battlefield concealed by hills, a spectacle being witnessed by Law¬
rence, All, and the other Arabs. Ali expresses empathy for the Turks
being so pounded; Lawrence does not. This is a subtle payoff of the
motif of mercy planted by Feisal in his initial conversation with Bendey,
a motif that will be revisited forcefully for the remainder of the picture.
The Arab army continues onward, and a dissolve is used again to
transition back to the British Army, where British troops march in the
same screen direction. Allenby rides in an open-topped command car;
Colonel Brighton waves him down and gets on board. Brighton wears
an Arab headdress, a visual clue suggesting he has made contact with
Lawrence and the Arab army, and makes his report, closing off the dan¬
gling cause of two scenes previous. He tells Allenby about Lawrence’s
cockiness, and predicts that the Arabs may reach Damascus before they
do. He qualifies his prediction by noting the presence of a Turkish col¬
umn ahead of him. Allenby ends the scene with another dialogue hook:
'T wonder where they are now.”
This line of dialogue leads to tlie transition to the village of Tafas,
which the Turkish soldiers are shown abandoning after evidently de¬
stroying it and massacring its occupants. The Turks are then seen in a
demoralized, bedraggled retreat across a dusty, windswept expanse.
Lawrence and the Arabs now move through the village, with a rage
evidently building up inside Lawrence. The Arab army lines up along a
ridge overlooking the retreating Turks, and here Lawrence is torn be¬
tween the counsel of Ali, who urges him to go around the Turks and
keep in mind the objective, Damascus, and the voice of one of his
guards, who urges ‘'No prisoners.”
While he is in the midst of this quandary, one of the Arabs—Tallal,
whose village was sacked—makes a suicide attack on the Turks. This
of/Irgb/a: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermissiom _ 139
action leads Lawrence to announce the attack with the command: No
^risoners!” What follows is the longest and most elaborate of the three
battle scenes in the picture, a lopsided massacre that closes off in bright
crimson the dangling cause initiated by Feisal earlier: With Lawence,
mercy is a passion; with me, it is just good manners. Yoiu will have to
see for yourself which is the more reliable.” It is also a payoff of Law¬
rence’s earlier line to Allenby describing his execution of Gasim: I en¬
joyed it.” 1 . j L
A long aftermath scene follows: a wordless, atmospheric advance by
the Arabs past the carnage, punctuated by Bentley's arrival to take a
photo of Lawrence after castigating Lawrence for the brutality.
The hash of Bentley’s camera provides a visual transition to the last
scene of the sequence, which finds Lavnence accompanying the Arabs
ever forward. A man rides up to him and offers him grapes picked the
previous night in Damascus—an indirect signal of their progress to
their objective. The man also reports that Allenby is not yet there.
Sequence P; The Ambiguous Outcome
The final sequence, which runs almost eighteen minutes, is centered on
Lawrence’s attempt to create a functioning, independent government
for the Arabs. It begins with a recapitulation scene that birings the audi¬
ence up-to-date with events occurring since the previous scene, and
launches several dangling causes that will be picked up in. the rest of the
sequence.
Allenby arrives in Damascus to alarge crowd of jeering Arabs; Colo¬
nel Brighton informs him that Lawrence is behind it—that he and his
Arab army had arrived a day and a half before and were occupying the
town hall and other critical municipal ministries.
Unlike Lawrence’s triuinphant attack on Aqaba, his arrival in Da¬
mascus occurs offscreen, with the-^motionaliy climactic moment com¬
ing some time before—during the massacre of the Turkish column. The
stojydellers have apparently chosen to emphasis the ambiguous nature
of the main character and his actions, instead of inve sting audience
emotional involvement in his military triuniph.
Brighton urges Allenby to clear out Lawrence and his men by force;
Dryden counsels against it, fearing a bloodbath. He informs Allenby
that Feisal will arrive in two daiys' time—a deadline providing the time
frame bywhich the problem must presumably be resolved. Allenby then
140
issues his orders: troops to stay quartered in their barracks, includi^
technical units—engineers and medics. This is a dangling cause that
shapes the action and leads to Lawrence's failure.
The scene switches to the town hall, where Lawrence tries in vain to
get the quarreling Arabs to cooperate with one another, The scene pro-
vides a masterful example of economy in writing—the screenwriter \s
able to use one scene to dramatize more than a year of wrangling be¬
tween the various Arab factions that occurred historically.
In attempting to resolve the disputes, Lawrence learns that the
phones do not work because the electricity does not work; Ah suggests
English engineers be used to fix the electricity^ and Lawrence objects,
telling him that to accept the help of English engineers is to accept En¬
glish government. This bit of exposition—delivered in the course of an
argument—sheds light on Allenby s decision to keep Army technical
units bound to the barracks. A late-arriving Arab announces that a fire
has broken out; Lawi'ence is compelled to rush out to try to solve that
crisis, and the meeting seems to dissolve into chaos.
Contrast—silence and darkness—marks the transition to the next
scene, which finds Allenby practicing fly-fishing and remarking about
taking it up after the war. The lights suddenly go out—the electricity
has failed. Soon afterward, the Arabs are seen leaving the city, resolving
Allenby's problem and signaling Lawrence's ultimate failure.
The resolution of the picture as a whole is thus at hand. The remain¬
der is an epilogue; while there is conflict and therefore dramatic tension
within the scenes, there is little in the way of tension—dramatic or
ironic—that runs through the whole.
Lawrence, working in a dark, silent, and mostly empty town hall,
writes a document while Auda and Ali stew nearby. Auda takes the doc¬
ument away from Lawrence and tries to convince him to return witlr
him to Arabia; Lawrence refuses and utters a prayer that he ^vill never
see the desert again; Auda predicts he will return; these are two dangling
causes that are never closed off. Most typically, in an epilogue, whatever
dangling causes that remain are resolved, but in this case, with an am¬
biguous hero, the storytellers opt for a final sequence that is more open-
ended.
Ali then reveals his own plans—he will stay and learn politics, an
occupation he'd never dreamed of till Lawrence entered his life. He
exits, and then he and Auda have one last confrontation, in which Ali
confesses his deeply ambivalent feelings for Lawrence, and Auda initi’
ates another dangling cause—that Ali will find being an “Arab” will be
more difficult than he expects.
Sixteen Seguen cesan^
Intermission
witches to Allenby, who receives a report from a medic^
Xhe flto ^ situation demanding his immediate attention. A -
“ce Xuirela dialogue hook that Unks the
lenby sends him L 4 Lawrence about
,cene to the next, hook-
overcrowded Tu^ s like?”-links this scene to the next in
Lawreoee as ' 8 hospital and is overwhelmed by its squalor,
which Lawren British medical crew arrives, resolving the hn-
Shordy after his arrival, a British medic
gering dangling Lhlsh soldier who does not recognize him.
slapped by an on r S Allenbv’s office, where Feisal attempts to
I'he film now switches to from Allenby and Dryden.
salvage some authority for the ri ^
pass., ptedKtafhat "“h "" rop.trmgCguenceh
SSe SIX appomtment thar, Mhe Auda e p.e-
iictioo, eitemis beyond the end P””', S,„ls „ne mote
Uwrenee exile the roomt Fe.sal •' ™P> “ “ „„„s„lvei Feisal
time bnt tt t, too late; yet another relaaonehtp is
“d Allenby ate left to h.ggl. over another tssue-the control
various governmental mmi-Stnes. through the of-
Whde these two wl’d slapped hen .1
ficers’mess and IS accosted by i-,,,. fmm the opening sequence
the military hospital. In a payoff of a line
,i„ »h.ch he reveals he’d shalen XX he X wanted to bi able
man asks to shake lawtenee s ^ ^ 'kC if they’d met befote,
to say I’d done it.” Lawrence replies by asking y
punching up the dramatic irony of the scenn negotiate;
to the building, looking, apparently, for Lawrence, who go
scene leaves another unresolved relationship. ^
In the final scene of the picture. Lamence'S beingmi
desert expanse, and the tw’o threads .Ijorld versus the Brit-
and subtly hookending it.
142
SCREENWRIT I N G
LAWRENCE OF ARABIA
Sequence Breakdown
Seq. Description
ACT I
A Lawreiice^s accidental death to start of journey to feisal
(excluding opening titles). Unifying Aspect: Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist: Lawrence. Objective: To get to the
desert.
Point of attack; Newspaper account of Arab attack.
Also, memorial service points in direction of story.
B Lawrence and his Bedouin guide trek through the
desert. His guide is killed at the well by Ali. Unifying
Aspect Dramatic Tejision. Protagonist: Lawrence.
Objective: To get to Prince Feisal with his guide.
C Lawrence arrives just as FeisaPs camp is under air
attack. He meets Feisal and joins in the retreat. Unifying
Aspect Event (meeting Feisal).
D Lawrence confers with Col. Brighton and Feisal in
FeisaPs tent. That night he comes up with his solution
to the problem: seizing Aqaba, and succeeds in
persuading Ali to Join him. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist: Lawrence. Objective: Initiate a
solution to the Arab problem.
Predicament: Lawrence undertakes to unite the Arabs
to throw off the Turks-
ACT II
(Main tension: Will Lawrence succeed in uniting the Arabs
to overthrow the Turks?)
£ The journey across tlie An Nafud desert, ending when 16:17 1:04:58
they reach the far side of the Sun’s Anvil. Unifying (31%)
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Lawrence.
Objective: To get through the An Nafud.
F Lawrence returns to the Sun s Anvil to rescue Gasim; in 13:27 1:18:25
the aftermath, Ali discovers Lawrence’s illegitimate (37%)
origins. While Lawrence is asleep, Ali burns Lawrence’s
clothes. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist
Lawrence. Objective: To rescue Gasim.
G Lawrence tries on his new Arabic clothing, encounters 14:53 J:33;18
Auda Abu Tayi> who threatens the other Arabs for (44%)
drinking from his well. Lawrence persuades him to
invite them to Wadi Rumm, where he then persuades
Auda to join them in an attack on Aqaba. Unifying
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Lawrence.
Objective: To get Auda to cooperate.
Running
Length Time
11:30 11;30
(5%)
17:06 28:36
(14%)
8:43 37:19
(18%)
14:10 51;29
(24%)
of Arabia: Sixteen Sequences and an Intermsssi^
143
^ The united Arab tribes set off for Aqaba; just prior to 15:42 1.49T
^ the attack, Lawrence is forced to execute Gasiin. The P ^
next morning, the Arabs attack Aqaba, after which,
Lawrence decides to head back to Cairo across the Sinai.
Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist
Lawrence. Objective: To lead a successful attack on
Aqaba.
First Cnlmination: The attack on Aqaba.
r Lawrence leads Farraj and Daud across Sinai; loses 11:30 2:01:30
Daud in a quicksand; Lawrence and Farraj arrive m
Cairo and drink at the officers’ dub. where Lawrence
announces that they had taken Aqaba. Unifying Aspect:
Dramatic Tension. Protagonisr. Lawrence. Objective. To
lead Farraj and Daud across Sinai to Cairo.
T Lawrence debriefs Gen, AUenby and tries to resign^ 12:04 2:12:34
Allenby persuades him to stay on and the two plan the fhi /«}
next campaign. Vnijying Aspect: Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist. Allenby. Objective-. To persuade La-wienceto
return to Arabia.
intermission
K American reporter Jackson Bentley arrives in Aqabaand 13.20 225.54
confers with Fdsal, then observes Lav-nence leading an
attack on a Turkish train. Uwrence is wounded by a
d^nng Turkish soldier; in the aftermath, Col. Brighton
warns Lawrence that the thieve^" atid desertion must
stop. Uniting Aspect Dramatic Tension. Promgomst
Bentley. Objective: A newspaper story about Lawnence.
L Lawrence leads another attack on a train, In which 1021 2.3m^6
horses are being tTansported. Auda takes the horses and
most of his men, kavlng Larvrenceb force very small
He struggles on wth the campaign, losing Farraj to an
accident in which he must be the executioner. Vmfying
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist: Lawrence.
Objective: To keep 1he campaign going.
M Col. Brighton and Gen .Allenby coufo about 13:22 2:5 hl8
Law'renceb chances of taking Dexaa; Lawrence
challenges his small ^rovp to walk on water with bun;
in Deraa, Lawrence’s effort to raise^a revolt is qurckly
thwarted; he is captured, tortured, and in the afurmatb,
tells Ali he is abandoning the cause. Unifying Aspect:
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Lawrence. ObjecUve-. To
foment revolt in Deraa.
Second CulmhifUtoii: at Deraa.
ACT in
N The main tension—will Lawrence succeed in uniting S.37
the Arabs against the Turks—has essentially been
resolved in the negative. In the thud act, hope for this
144
SCREENWRtTiNQ
is revived with a nevv> specific focus: the campaign
against Damascus, and the achievement of self-
government {i.e., overthrowing the British as well as tlie
Turks). In this sequence, Lawrence returns to British
headquarters, where he discovers tlie secret pact the
British and French have signed to rule Arabia after the
war; he tries a second time to resign. Gen. Allenby again
persuades him to stay on and lead the Arabs in an attack
on Damascus, Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist Lawrence. Objective'. To resign.
O Lawrence leads the Arabs on an attack on a fleeing 14:50 3; 14:45
Turkish column, then on into Damascus. Unifying (92%)
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Lawrence,
Objective: To lead the Arabs to Damascus before the
British Army gets there.
? Lawrence tries in vain to get the Arabs to unite in 17:44 3:32:29
governing Damascus; in the end, Feisal is able to achieve (100%)
partial victory and Lawrence returns to England.
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist
Lawrence. Objective: To establish an independent Arab
government in Damascus.
Resolution: Lawrence fails to achieve his objective of
freedom for the Arabs.
The Graduate: Passive Main
Character
The “passive main character” poses a vexing problem for screenwriters.
As detailed in Chapter 1, the most commonly used tool in engaging au¬
dience attention is dramatic tension, which relies on a character who
actively strives to achieve an ohjective. The implication is that a passive
main character^one with little or no desire andfor little interest in
achieving an ohjective-is a poor choice of protagonist and shonld be
"^^e'^only problem with this argument is that some great have
been made with passive main characters, among them Stdag J 7 (19 ,
Being There (1979), and. in the present study. The Graduate (1967)
is thus useful to remember that a writer is confined not by rules or for¬
mulae but only by the need to keep an audience wondering what is
going to happen next. In the case of The Graduate, the tool used to
achieve this, in the central part of the film, is dramatic irony.
While it is certainly true that dramatic tension is used in the hist
act-seduction-and in the last act^Benh famous pursuit of
Elaine-in Act II, the story is propelled primarily by fear in the audience
of what will happen when Ben’s secret is revealed, and hope that he tvill
be able to keep it concealed. While he clearly vraiits sex, he doesn t strive
for it, and his partner is willirig, so there is no obstacle to getting it
other than the care he needs to take to avoid being found out Later,
when he meets Elaine, his objective is to ditch her, and again obstacles
are minimal. The excitement, again, comes from his fear of discovery-
—145- —
146
y/ie Graduate: Passive Mgin Character
147
SCREEN WRITING
As to sequence structure, the film is noteworthy in having only
seven—two in the first act, three in the second, and two in the third. i
Sequence A: Escape
The eighteen-minute opening sequence is unified by an escape attempt:
Ben trying to escape from the party, once he achieves this, from the
seduction attempt by Mrs. Robinson. Aside from being engaging, it is
also a tour deforce in exposition, establishing not only Ben's immediate
situation, but also the web of relationships around him. Although the
film is a comedy, it veers into searing pain in the second half as these
relationships are ripped apart.
The picture opens with both a visual puzzle—a close-up of a young
man, seen in the title sequence, who is sitting by an aquarium in such a
way that it appears he’s underwater—and a verbal puzzle: an offscreen
voice asking the man, '‘What's the matter?" Very quickly, a certain
amount of dramatic tension is introduced—the parents want Ben to
come downstairs, and he doesn’t want to.
During this conversation, the exposition as ammunition approach
(see text box, page 22) is used. In trying to persuade Ben to come down¬
stairs, Ben’s father reveals that guests are downstairs, that they're all
good friends of the family who have known him since he was born. Ben '
in turn expresses concern about his future. When Ben’s mother enters
and asks if anything’s wrong, Ben’s father says “no”—yielding insight
into the family system: Ben's expressed needs are ignored.
After Ben is conveyed downstairs, the scene plays out as a classic es¬
cape, with Ben making three attempts to get out, the first two thwarted
by suffocating guests, before he succeeds at last and closes the door in
an apparent victory.
Ben's quiet moments alone—a classic aftermath scene—give the au¬
dience its first glimpse of a possible outcome to the sequence—Ben suc¬
ceeds. VIrs. Robinson arrives after a brief respite, though, and the
conflict resumes. It's worth noting that Ben’s attempts to persuade Mrs,
Robinson to leave him alone are constrained by their relationship,
which has been carefully set up in the preceding four minutes: she is
not only an adult, but a lifelong acquaintance and family friend. He
can’t just blow her off.
Soon enough, she does go away, giving Ben another apparent victory
before she returns once more and asks for the ride home, an obligation
from which Ben cannot escape, This brief interlude of apparent success
IS actually the second glimpse of a plausible outcome to the sequence:
Ben succeeding in escaping.
During the next seven minutes, although Ben remains the protago-
irist” of the sequence and his objective remains the same escape he
plays an increasingly passive role, and Mrs. Robinson s attempt at se¬
duction shapes the action. Drawing on their long-standing relationship
and her parent-like authority, Mrs. Robinson cajoles him into keeping
her company, plies him with a drink, puts on music, and opens up to
him. Ben guesses her game—seduction—and calls her on it, giving the
audience a glimpse of yet another outcome to the sequence: he con¬
fronts Mrs. Robinson and is able to go home.
Mrs. Robinson uses superb manipulative skills to salvage the situa¬
tion, again drawing on her position as parent/authority figure. With Ben
embarrassed by his accusation, Mrs. Robinson gets him upstairs on the
pretext of looking at Elaine's portrait—a subtle introduction of one of
the major characters.
Mrs. Robinson resumes and escalates her seduction attempt in the
intimacy of Blaine's room, hut overplays her hand and Ben agam calls
her on it, this time leaving the room and going downstairs. This repre¬
sents the fourth glimpse at a positive outcome for Ben.
Mrs. Robinson again salvages the situation with a request that Ben
bring her purse, and this leads to her final, most explicit attempt at se- ^
duction, confronting him in the bedroom, naked, and inviting him to
cad any time—a dangling cause picked up in the second sequence, Ben
rejects her one last time as Mr. Robmson arrives.
Now Ben has successfully resisted seduction, and the “third act” of
the sequence commences: escape from Mr, Robinson. The four-minute
scene is propelled by dramatic irony: audience knowledge of what has
just happened between Ben and Mrs. Robinson. The richness of the
irony is explored in Mr. Robinion’s advice to Ben to sow some wild oats
and “have a good time Mth the girls,” and his lemark to Mrs. Robinson
that Ben is the type who needs to fight women off. Mr. Robinson's re¬
marks also reinforce the impression of the principles’ dose-knit rela¬
tionships, reminding Ben that their fathers are partners and that he d
watched Ben grow up.
The sequence ends with the telegraphing of Elaine’s airival back
home, and .a dangling cause uttered ironically by Mrs. Robinson: 111
see you soon, I hope.'’
148
SCREENWRITING
Sequence B: Consummating the Affair
The second sequence, which runs just under seventeen minutes, is cen¬
tered on Ben's desire to follow through on Mrs. Robinson’s invitation
to have an affair. While this is structured as dramatic tension—
protagonist with an objective—the tension derived from it is primarily
ironic—fear that the affair will be found out. This need for secrecy, and
Ben's ambivalence, can be seen as the primary obstacles.
The sequence begins with a three-minute birthday-party scene,
which contributes to the tension of the sequence only in the sense that
it dramatizes how empty and unhappy Ben's life is with his parents. As
in the opening scene of the picture, they ignore his feelings and in this
case embarrass him. The scene has dramatic tension—Mr. Robinson
trying to get Ben out of the house—and provides a good example of
retardation: half of the scene elapses between when Ben’s voice is heard
from inside the house, and when his father finally throws open the door
and reveals the birthday present (scuba outfit) Ben is wearing. After he
gets into the pool, an aftermath scene ensues, in which Ben stands qui¬
etly isolated at the bottona.
The following scene picks up on the dangling causes left over from
the first sequence—Mrs. Robinson’s offer to see Ben any time, and her
expressed hope that she'll see him soon. Ben is on the phone to Mrs.
Robinson, inviting her to a drink at the Taft Hotel. He is smoking—a
payoff of a remark made in the opening sequence by Mrs. Robinson
(“The track star doesn't smoke.") Mrs. Robinson replies to his invita¬
tion by saying sheTl be there in an hour, an appointment that helps to
frame the following scene, which involves nothing more than Ben wait¬
ing for her.
The “first act" of the sequence is essentially set with these few words,
since the bulk of the setup—Mrs. Robinson’s attempted seduction and
her invitation to him to call to consummate an affair—occurred in the
previous sequence.
After Ben speaks to Mrs. Robinson, he wanders around the lobby of
the hotel, encounters the suspicious clerk, awkwardly introduces him¬
self at a party where he’s not a guest, then finally enters a bar and waits
for her. When Mrs. Robinson arrives, Ben is tasked by her with getting
a room, generating a scene propelled by simple dramatic tension, the
object being the room, the obstacle being the suspicious hotel clerk, and
the emotion springing from fear of discovery.
G raduate: Passive Main Character
149
Pen succeeds in getting the room, then Mrs. Robinson makes an ap¬
pointment to meet him there in five minutes. This appointment sus¬
tains anticipation through Ben’s long approach to the room along the
corridor of the hotel, and his nervous preparations, which include a
tooth brushing that pays off some dialogue planted earlier.
With Mrs. Robinson’s arrival in the room, the “third act” of the se¬
quence is at hand. The tension surrounding Ben’s getting the room is
resolved; now there remains only for him to consummate the affair. His
awkwardness and deep ambivalence provide the obstacles to this objec¬
tive. The scene culminates with Ben calling it off, in the process articu¬
lating his- moral concerns and the web of relationships that will be
endangered if they are discovered. These issues, implied till now but
here made explicit, provide the stakes underlying the hopes and fears of
the second act.
At this point in the scene, Mrs. Robinson manipulates him once
more, displaying skill she’d shown in the opening sequence. She ques¬
tions his manhood, and he rises to the challenge. When the room goes
dark, the sequence ends, and music (which, as in Toy Stoiy, serves as a
curtam) signals the transition from Sequence B to Sequence C, and
from first act to second.
Sequence C; The Affair
The third sequence, a short one at just over seven minutes, commences
with a four-minute musical interlude portraying Ben drifting through
the summer and the affair. There are several hints of conflict beUveen
him and his parents, a conflict that is developed during the scenes that
follow.
During a confrontation beAveen Ben and his father, the Robinsons
arrive, creating some ironic tension, and Mr. Robiiison> for a second
time, tells Ben that Elaine will he coming to town soon, and asks him
to give her a call—a dangling cause picked up during the next two se¬
quences.
In the subsequent scene with his mother, the ironic tension that
spikes at the tail end of the scene with the Robinsons is developed fur¬
ther. Here, she inquires about his late-night activities, and he struggles
to keep cool to preserve the secret.
150
151
SCREENWRITING
Sequence D: The Confrontation
Sequence D consists of a single scene that runs over nine minutes in
length. It is something of an anomaly because it has little causal connec¬
tion to the previous sequence beyond a sense that Ben is taking his
father's advice and becoming more active—though not on his career or
studies, but on his relationship with Mrs. Robinson.
The scene/sequence is unified by dramatic tension: Ben's desire to
connect with Mrs. Robinson on more than a sexual level, and Mrs. Rob¬
inson's resistance to this. It follows a three-act structure, with Ben de¬
claring his intent to talk to her, and succeeding in this regard, three
minutes into the scene; a resulting culmination, or turning point, when
their discussion turns to Elaine and escalates into a confrontation; and
a resolution to the tension when the two agree to have sex after all, with
Ben now the one refusing to talk.
Mrs. Robinson's warnings to Ben that he promise never to take out
Elaine are dangling causes that pick up on Mr. Robinson's previous sug¬
gestions to Ben, and are realized in the subsequent sequence, which will
center on the problem of Elaine.
Sequence E: Elaine
This fifteen-minute sequence is centered on Elaine’s intrusion into
Ben's life. As in Sequence C, the tool used to engage the audience is
primarily dramatic irony. Ben clearly has a dramatic objective—alienate
Elaine—but no dramatically compelling obstacle presents itself beyond
perhaps creating waves in his relationship with Mr. Robinson and his
parents. What generates the tension is the fear that Elaine will discover
Ben's secret. The last third of the sequence echoes the last third of the
movie as a whole: Ben pursues Elaine. Mrs. Robinson interferes, though,
and in revealing the affair to Elaine, she resolves the ironic tension of
the sequence.
The sequence begins with two simple dramatic scenes, which actually
share the same line of dramatic tension: Ben’s parents try to urge him
to ask Elaine out. When he refuses, Ben's mother threatens to invite all
the Robinsons over for dinner, forcing Ben's hand, Ben’s decision to ask
Elaine out, and Mrs. Robinson's enraged response, pickup on dangling
causes in several previous sequences.
Ti ^raduate: Passive Main Character
When Ben arrives at the Robinsons to pick up Elaine, the scene is
rich with ironic tension, as Ben is fearful of Mrs. Robinson’s reaction,
and Mr. Robinson is completely oblivious to what is going on behind
his back. Here, Ben telegraphs his agenda to Mrs. Robinson—he plans
to treat Elaine to dinner and a drink and bring her right back. This ef¬
fectively ends the "sequence first act," as the main character s objective
is clear and he sets out to realize it.
Ben takes Elaine on a fast car ride and provides minimal verbal inter¬
action, then leads her to a strip club, where she is humiliated. Her tears
evoke a strong feeling of regret in him, and he pursues her and attempts
to apologize for his rudeness. His apology extends into the next scene
at a fast-food drive-m, where the two become better acquainted, and in
the scene that follows this, when Ben stops his car in front of her house
to let her off and it is apparent their relationship has improved consid¬
erably. Here, Ben decides not to drop her off after all—in violation of
his own stated plan—and the twm proceed to the Taft Hotel for a drink.
In the brief, comical scene that follows, many hotel employees recog¬
nize him and call him by the false name he’d given at the hotel initially.
Ben is thus exposed to Elaine as having had an affair, though he doesn t
reveal with whom. The scene is imbued with dramatic irony—fear that
the truth will come out. Ben confesses his liking for her; she reveals the
feeling is mutual, and the two make an appointment for a date the fol-
lowing day.
Figure 14 A considerable portion of The Gfeduate{1967) is driven by dra¬
matic irony—the audience’s tear that Ben’s illicit affair will be found out
This scene, in Sequence E. explores the problem in a comic way— many ot
the Taft Hotel's workers identify Sen as "Mr. Gladstone.’' The fear is that
Elaine will figure it out. (Frame enilargement)
152
SCREENWRITINg
The next scene features preparation by contrast—Ben is shown driv¬
ing his car in the rain^ a box of flowers ready, anticipating his date with
Elaine. He stops the car and a woman gets inside—who is abruptly
shown to be not Elaine but rather Mrs. Robinson. She warns him never
to see Elaine again; he refuses to obey; she threatens to expose the affair.
He rushes off to get to Elaine before Mrs. Robinson does.
Ben tries desperately to get Elaine out of the house before Mrs. Rob¬
inson arrives, but he fails, and the truth comes out at last. This shatter¬
ing scene of recognition resolves at last the ironic tension created at the
commencement of the affair at the end of the first act, and thus marks
not only the end of the sequence but also the end of the second act. The
main tension has been resolved in the negative: Ben has failed to keep
the secret.
Sequence F: The Quest Begins
As in the transition between the first and second acts, a musical inter¬
lude provides the curtain that separates the second and third acts. This
interlude fulfills the function of an aftermath scene, a pause that helps
the audience digest the shattering power of the scene of recognition that
just preceded it. Ben remains passive, either lying around in his room,
or watching Elaine from a distance. There are some hints of change in
him, though—his hair is left more tousled and his makeup suggests fa¬
tigue.
At the end of this interlude, Ben announces to his parents that he is
marrying Elaine. This dangling cause propels the last third of the movie.
In fact, the brief scene with his parents constitutes what might be con¬
sidered the “first act''—or setup—of the entire third act of the film. All
the exposition has been taken care of—the audience is aware of who
Ben and Elaine are, all their relationships, and the history between
them. In the scene with his parents, Ben reveals that he hasn't told any¬
one about his intention to marry Elaine, not even Elaine, and that in
fact Elaine doesn't like him. The obstacles to his objective are thus laid
out, so immediately upon conclusion of the scene, the third act ten¬
sion—will Ben succeed in marrying Elaine?—is initiated. Dramatic ten¬
sion at last takes over forcefully as the chief tool used to engage audience
attention and more than two-thirds of the way into the movie, it takes
on a more traditional structure.
n egate: Passive Main Character
153
Ren also tells Ills parents he is leaving for Berkeley that day, and has
suitcase in his hand, an appointment that is paid ofi m the next scene,
len Ben is shown drmng north to Berkeley. The rrrter-act musrcal m-
Ide is picked up again during this drive and in several scenes after¬
ward when Ben is shown watching Elaine from a distance.
The interlude ends when Ben moves into an apartment, then pursues
Flaine on a bus and makes his first contact with her. His pursuit meets
her immediate resistance, intensifying the dramatic tension, and at t e
, 00 -a destination telegraphed on their bus ride-Ben encounters his
first big obstacle, Carl, Elaine’s boyfriend. Afier Elame and Carl depart,
Ben remains quietly behind, in an aftermath scene that reinforces the
strong emotions he feds for Elaine, and the dimension of the problem
he faces in realizing his objective.
Ben is next shown shaving in his room, when Elaine visits him and
confronts him about his appearance in Berkeley. In the course of the
argument, Elaine reveals that her mother claims that Ben raped her; Ben
sets her straight on this and an important obstacle to his o jec ive ls
removed. In the process, though, Ben is ordered by his landlord to leave,
setting up .a new obstade, and as a consequence he seems to lose hrs
drive to his objective. He begins to pack and teUs her he s not m me
mood to talk. In response, Elaine unexpectedly tells him she wants him
to stay, at least until he has a definite plan. This significant developmen
is punctuated by a short aftermath scene, in which Ben watches her eu
the apartment and walk down the street.
ritfiir-A “Tm 2oin£ to many Elaine Robinson." With this dangling
ca^use Ben launches the dramatic tension that unifies the entirety of the
third act of The Graduate (1967): will he succeed in tracking down Elaine
and getting her to marry hinn? (Frame enlargement)
154
SCREENWRITING
Elaine returns that night in what amounts to a continuation of the
previous scene; here, the roles are reversed, as she has become the pur¬
suer. She requests that he kiss her, and he asks her to marry him. She
seems open to the idea, and tells him shell think about it—a dangling
cause picked up in the following scene.
This amounts to the end of the “second act'' of the sequence, a turn¬
ing point where Elaine proves to be open to the idea of marriage, and
now it becomes simply a matter of Ben pursuing her so as to close the
deal. For the rest of the sequence, he pursues her and badgers her about
getting married, first outside a classroom, then in a gymnasium, where
she announces she's seeing her boyfriend Carl that night to discuss mar¬
riage. Ben's emphatic reaction—a loud “What?”—is a dialogue hook
that is picked up in the following scene at the library, where he asks
Elaine how he proposed and where—suggesting a car—a payoff of the
dialogue earlier in which Mrs. Robinson revealed Elaine was conceived
in the back of a Ford.
The sequence reaches an apparently positive resolution outside
Elaine's classroom, where Ben asks her if theyll get married the next
day, and she replies, “Maybe we are, maybe we're not”—a dialogue
hook that, combined with the kiss at the end of the scene, knits it to the
seventh and final sequence of the picture.
Sequence G: A Chase In The Final Reel
This fifteen-minute sequence, which centers on Ben's quest to get to
Elaine before she marries Carl, begins with a classic scene of preparation
by contrast: Ben proceeds to buy an engagement ring, flowers, and some
other presents, giving the impression of an impending wedding. This
expectation ends in the surprise twist: Mr. Robinson is waiting for him
in his room.
Mr. Robinson provides a grave obstacle to Ben's ambitions; he in¬
forms Ben that he's already contacted Elaine to make sure Ben can't get
to her; the scene then ends with a dangling cause—-a threat that if Ben
ever tries to pursue Elaine he’ll be arrested—which hooks the scene into
the next.
Ben tries to contact Elaine by phone, then in person; he discovers
she has left school, and gets a note from her apologizing and explaining
her parents' anger at her. Ben next heads south to the Robinson house,
where he learns from Mrs. Robinson that Elaine will soon be married.
jhe Graduate: Passive Main Character
155
pbis deadline serves to intensify the remaining dramatic tension, and
disclosure to Ben (and the audience) marks the end of the “first act” of
the sequence: Ben's objective and principal obstacle are made clear. Be¬
fore leaving Mrs. Robinson, Ben warns her that he will find her and
Mrs. Robinson expresses doubt—dialogue that hooks the scene into the
next one, which finds Ben speeding back to Berkeley.
Ben stops at Carl's frat house, where he gets confirmation that Carl
is indeed getting married, and finds out where: Santa Barbara. Ben re¬
sumes his speedy quest to Santa Barbara, where he stops at a gas station
to try to find out where the wedding is taking place. As he hops back
into his car, the gas station attendant asks him if he needs gas—a motif
paid off in the following scene, when he runs out, short of the church.
Ben runs the final distance, only to discover the wedding has just
ended, presenting an apparently negative resolution to the sequence and
film as a whole. Upon seeing Ben, though, and surveying the angry reac¬
tion of her family, Elaine chooses him and the two make a memorable
escape from the church.
They mount a bus, and sit wordlessly in one of the great aftermath
scenes in cinema historic
156
screenwriting
THE GRADUATE
Sequence Breakdown
Running
Seq. Description Length Time
ACT I
A Benjamin flees from the party, fends off Mrs. Robinson, 18:05 18:05
unwinds with Mr. Robinson afterward (excluding (18%)
opening titles). Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist: Ben. Objective: To be alone.
Point of attack: Mrs. Robmson tries to seduce Ben.
B Benjamin endures humiliation with his scuba gear, then 16:56 35:01
initiates the affair with Mrs. Robinson at the Taft Hotel. (34%)
Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Ben.
Objective: Sex.
Predicament: Benjamin is having an affair with the
wife of his father’s partner.
ACT ll
(Main tension: Will Benjamin be able to continue his affair
without being found out?)
C Musical montage portraying the affair; Ben’s Mom 7:45 42:46
becomes suspicious. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. (42%)
Protagonist. Ben. Objective: To conceal the affair.
D Ben tries to engage Mrs, Robinson in taU<; she w'arns 9:13 51:59
him against asking out Elaine. Unifying Aspect: (51%)
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Ben. Objective: To
corrununicate with Mrs, Robmson.
First Culmination: Ben asks Elaine out (53:11—52%).
E Ben’s Dad suggests he ask Elaine out; under threat of a 15:20 1:07:19
parly he does so; he takes her on a date, falls in love, (66%)
Mrs. Robinson ambushes him and the truth comes out
to Elaine. Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist: Ben. Objective: To deal with Elaine.
Second Culmination: Ben has fallen in love with
Elaine but his affair apparently wipes out any hope
for him (1:07:19—66%),
ACT in
F The main tension has been resolved—the affair w’^as 19:45 1:27:05
discovered—bur a new tension has taken its place: Ben (85%)
wants to marry Elaine, This sequence (and act) begins
with a musical montage, proceeds with Ben’s
declaration that he is going to marry Elaine; he pursues
her in Berkeley, at last gets her to say ^'Maybe.” Unifying
Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Ben. Objective:
To get Elaine to marry him.
Graduate: Passive Main Character
2 Benjamin buys a ring—then finds his plans thwarted by 15:10 1:42^25
the arrival of Mr, Robmson. Benjamin franticaEy (100%)
pursues Elaine—first to L.A., then back to Berkeley, and
finally down to Santa Barbara for the fiuale. Unifying
Aspect: Dramalic Tension. Protagonist Ben. Objective.
Elaine.
Resolution: Ben and Elaine make it to the bus.
Epilogue: Ben and Elaine on the bus,__
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
Nest: Midpoint Reversal
I his shattering 1975 wnner of five Academy Awards is powered pri¬
marily by the tool of dramatic tension—the desire of one character,
5 the system to avoid labor at the work farm!
McMurphy runs into some substantial obstacles while in pursuit of his
objective but in the end his own “flaw”-his basic decency, humanity
and impulse to inspire joy m the life of others-bnngs him down. Thus!
unlike sorne of the other pictures studied in this volume that are pro¬
pelled by dramatic tension, the protagonist’s struggle toward his objec¬
tive IS somewhat muted in Cuckoo’s Nest. McMurphy is not constantly
scheming for ways to beat the system; rather, he is constantly distracted
from that objective by pursuing other kinds of activities that strike his
fancy. As a consequence, the film has something of a more leisurely
pace, and many of the scenes and sequences are not connected with a
cham-hke cause-and-effect aspect notable m other films studied herein.
The film is unified by place as well as dramatic tension: only one
sequence takes place away from the state mental institution. With antic¬
ipation created by McMurphy’s objective, and the sense of unity shored
up by consistency of place, the filmmakers are free to explore the subject
manner m an ensemble fashion, and develop several subplots explotina
the theme of freedom, among these the story of the Chief and that of
Billy Bibbit.
In terms of sequence structure, the film is unusual m that it has nine
o them the third act has three instead of the typical two, Consi.stent
— 158 —
f=few Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: Midpoint Reversal
159
with the leisurely pace of the filmj three of the nine are unified not by
tension but by events or actions.
Sequence A: The New Arrival
The picture begins with a series of wsua] pu 22 leSj accompaniedby music
that plants, subtly, a Native Ameiican motif. The opening image is that
of an automobile approaching at either dawn or dusk, and is followed
by the images of patients asleep inside an institution. The occupants of
the automobile and their purpose are left a myster^s and the connection
with this and the sleeping inmates is not at first clear.
Soon enough the film shows what appears to be the ward of a hospi¬
tal coming to life, with the antagonist of the picture, Nurse Ratched,
introduced in what appears to be the flow of a normal morning. Pa¬
tients are treated to ‘'Medication Time," accompanied by calming clas¬
sical music,
When the mysterious automohile arrives at the institution and
McMurphy is taken out and released into the custody of the medical
personnel, the pieces of the pu 22 le begin to fall into place. When Nurse
Ratched and her assistant Nurse Pilbow start invenloT)'ing the contents
of McMurphyN bag, it is dear he will be staying at the institution for a
while. McMurphy casually makes his rounds of the ward, introducing
himself first to the Chief (an act that signals the Chief's coming signifi¬
cance in the story), then to some of the other inmates who play cards.
In this scene, the motifs of card plapng and of McMurphyN "'dirty" set
of cards are planted.
Eight and a half minutes into the opening sequence, McMurphy ar¬
rives at an intake interview with Dr. Spivey, and the remaining ques¬
tions raised by the opening puzzle are answered: McMurphy has a
criminal record and has been sent to the mental institution from the
work farm for evaluation to see if he's mentally ill. There is also a suspi¬
cion that McMurphy is faking his mental illness in order to get off work
duty. Although it's impossible to knotv for sure, MciMurphyh mischie¬
vous nature, manifest in this scene and the previous one, suggest that
he may indeed be trying to fake the mental illness.
During the course of the scene, the motif of fishing is planted
(through McMurphy’s obserc^atione about a photo of Dr. Spivey hold¬
ing up a big hsh), as is McKlurphy’s propensity for getting into fist-
fights. The scene (and sequence) end with Dr. Spivey telegraphing the
160
screenwriting
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: Midpoint Reversal
161
future plan (McMurphy will remain there for a while for evaluation),
and with McMurphy^s declaration: "I think it^s time we got to the bot¬
tom of R. P. McMurph/’—a dangling cause that is picked up and devel
oped throughout the rest of the picture.
Sequence B: Getting Acquainted
The second sequence in large measure continues both the leisurely pace
of the first and its general thrust: McMurphy is getting acquainted with
bis new home. Like Sequence A, it is unified more by an event than by
dramatic tension built from the desire of a protagonist. What distin¬
guishes the three scenes of Sequence B from Sequence A is the introduc¬
tion of important information at the Dr. Spivey scene, which amounts
to the point of attack of the picture. McMurphy's background and his
apparent intent (to fake mental illness) infuses the subsequent scenes
with a subtle ironic tension.
It could be argued that the first act of the movie as a whole ends with
the interview scene in Dr. Spivey’s officej because it is at this point that
McMurphy's objective is substantially revealed, and the subsequent
scenes find him pursuing this objective albeit at a leisurely pace. One
important ingredient is still missing at that point, though: Nurse
Ratched. She is introduced in the first sequence but only in a very cur¬
sory way; the central role she plays in the institution and in the story
has yet to be made clear, and the initiation of her relationship with
McMurphy is the subject of the second sequence (she is present in all
three scenes).
The sequence opens with the first of the group therapy scenes; Nurse
Ratched is the protagonist of the scene and her desire is to lead the dis¬
cussion. After overcoming initial resistance, the discussion occurs—
degenerating into a gruesome verbal slugfest. The scene ends with a
brief aftermath beat: McMurphy and Nurse Ratched making eye contact
across the room.
The film then switches to the recreational area of the institution, wilh
no causal connection to the previous scene. McMurphy notes the barbed
wire fence and a school bus loading some of the patients just outside
the perimeter—planting two motifs paid off in Sequence D. The protag¬
onist of the scene is McMurphy; his objective is to teach the Chief to
play basketball. While he is trying (and, ultimately, failing at this task)
Nurse Ratched is shown watching his activities from a high window.
The third and final scene of the sequence finds VIcMurphy and the
other patients playing cards, paying off the motif established earlier.
Two other important motifs are planted in the scene: gambling for ciga¬
rettes and McMurphyT interest in the World Series. McMurphy is the
protagonist of the scene, and his objective is to play cards; the obstacles
consist of the mental incapacity of some of the patients and the loud
music. In trying to turn down the music, McMurphy has his first direct
confrontation with Nurse Ratched, which ends with him pretending to
swallow a pill she insists he take. Afterward, he makes a bet with the
otliers that in one week hell “put a bug so far up her ass she won’t
know whether to shit or wind a wristw^atch.” This dangling cause serves
as a dialogue hook into the next sequence, where it is played out over
the issue of a baseball game.
The end of the scene marks the end of the first act. All the principal
characters have been introduced, McMurphy’s objective has been made
clear, and his chief obstacle—Nurse Ratched—has been introduced as
well. The main tension—will McMurphy be able to beat the system?—is
now in play.
Sequence C: “Want to watch the World Series?"
This seventeen-minute sequence is the first in the picture unified by
dramatic tension. McMurphy is the protagonist, and his objective is to
get the schedule changed so everyone can watch the World Series. It
begins with a strong undercurrent of dramatic irony—the audience
knows about McMurph/s bet to antagonize Nurse Ratched but she is,
of course, unaware.
The opening scene is the second of the group therapy sessions, which
finds McMurphy clean-shaven and wearing a white shirt in contrast to
his earlier more disheveled appearance. The choice of costume suggests
he is concealing his true intent from Nurse Ratched, since his clean-cut
appearance belies what we know^ about his darker, more mischievous
nature. McMurphy raises the issue of the World Series^ and is rebuffed
when only Uvo other patients vote with him on the issue. His attempt
to arrange the schedule so he can-watch the World Series amounts to
the end of the ^Trst act” of the sequence,
Afterward in the tub room, McMurphy bioods over his defeat, then
makes a second attempt to see the game—by betting the others that he
can lift a plumbing fixture and throw it through a window, effecting his
162
163
SC REEL WRITINGS
escape to a bar downtown. He fails to lift the fixture and loses the bet_
and simultaneously plants an important motif (the plumbing fixture)
and demonstrates his willingness to try, and to take risks.
The next scene finds McMurphy and the patients back in group ther¬
apy, with Billy describing his attempt to propose to a girl he was in love
with. This dialogue initiates Billyhs subplot, providing exposition about
his sensitivity, his interest in girls, his attempt at suicide, his overbear^
ing, suffocating mother, and that mother's relationship to Nurse
Ratched.
Cheswick interrupts the conversation and re-introduces the World
Series. This time, inspired by McMurphy's example, all nine members
of the group vote in favor of changing the schedule. Unfortunately,
Nurse Ratched advises McMurphy that he needs one more vote—from
one of the “chronics'' who occupy the other parts of the ward. McMur¬
phy frantically tries to persuade one to raise his hand; when at last the
Chief does so, Nurse Ratched declares the session closed and offers to
let him bring it up the following day.
The resolution of the tension of the sequence Is negative—
McMurphy fails to get his way—but in the last few minutes of it he
pretends to watch the game on the television, igniting excitement on
the part of the other patients, much to Nurse Ratched's disapproval.
Sequence D: A Fishing Expedition
This sixteen-minute sequence is again unified by dramatic tension. It is
also the only sequence that takes place primarily outside the institution.
It begins with McMurphy in Dr. Spivey's office for a follow-up inter¬
view, which serves as a recapitulation scene—we discover that McMur¬
phy has been at the institution for four weeks, and that he’s unhappy
with Nurse Ratched, who plays a “rigged game.” It also picks up on an
issue left dangling after the first sequence—the question of whether or
not McMurphy is faking mental illness. Dr. Spivey teUs him he sees no
evidence of such illness and opines that McMurphy has been putting
them on. McMurphy objects to the doctor's conclusion, and his desire
to “prove” his insanity is what drives the sequence. The scene with Dr.
Spivey thus serves as the “first act” of the sequence, setting up its ten¬
sion.
Over the Cuckoo's Nest: Midpoint Reversal
The film cuts to the the recreation area, where McMurphy enlists
the Chief's help in climbing over the fence—paying off McMurphy s
observation in the first sequence about the fence, a nearby tree and the
waiting just beyond. The Chief’s smiling reaction hints that Mc-
Ivlntphy is having an effect on him.
McMurphy hijacks the bus with the other patients onboard, picks up
his girlfriend Candy and then takes them all to a marina, where he leads
them onto a boat. Candy urges McMurphy to stop, warning him he’ll
wind up in jail agairr, to which McMurphy replies that they won’t throw
him in jail, because he's insane. This serves to reinforce for the audience
McMurphy s intention in the sequence.
The harbormaster’s objections to McMurphy's seizure of the boat
provide the only remaining obstacle to him, after which the actual fish¬
ing trip is played more for comic effect and lacks true tension. During
the fishing expedition, Billy's subplot is developed through his interest
in Candy, and McMurphy's humanity—his desire to share joy with oth¬
ers—is dramatized in the way he teaches the other patients to fish, and
the ensuing excitement when one of the fish actually bites.
Figure 16. “Sixty-eight days!'’ McMurphy brags in the first culmination of
One Fiew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975). The moinent is a high point for
him, and a reasonable glimpse of a possible outcome to the story. McMur¬
phy succeeds in fooiing the institotiora staff that he s insane, resulting a
short, easy stay there before he is freed. Shortly after this, he discovers
how wrong he is, and the film proceeds to its tragic resoiution, the mirror
opposite of the image here. (Frame enlargement)
164
SCREENWRmNCi
The sequence ends with the yacht’s return to the harbor, where the
police and Dr. Spivey wait.
Sequence E: Midpoint Reversal
Another scene in Dr. Spivey’s office opens the fifth sequence, where a
group of doctors conclude that McMurphy is in fact mentally ill. Still
Dr. Spivey believes he should be sent back to the work farm, and, ironi¬
cally, it is Nurse Ratched who finally persuades him to keep McMurphy
at the institution where she can try to "'help” him. Nurse Ratched,
McMurphy’s chief antagonist, is the one who hands him a victory he'd
long sought.
The joy of McMurphy’s victory is reinforced in the following scene,
which takes place at the basketball court, where McMurphy leads the
patients in a lively game against Robinson and the other attendants.
After initial setbacks, the Chief comes to life and participates, bringing
a sense of exhiliaration to McMurphy and his teammates. This scene
and the one that follows mark the first culmination of the picture—and
the first genuine glimpse of how it might reasonably end: McMurphy
escapes from the work farm and then is released after a leisurely stay at
the institution.
In fact, though, the basketball scene serves as a scene of preparation
by contrast, raising the audience's hope so as to enhance the sense of
disaster when the reversal comes in the next scene, when attendant
Washington informs a jubilant McMurphy that he is going to stay at
the institution indefinitely—not for only the 68 days McMurphy had
believed. This shattering revelation reverses McMurphy's objective—
from trying to persuade the staff he is mentally ill to trying to persuade
them of the opposite. The main tension remains the same—trying to
beat the system—but his means of beating it have now been reversed.
This revelation provides the end of the ''first acN of the sequence—
McMurphy’s objective is to come to grips with the disaster he’s brought
on himself. He does this during the next scene, a group therapy session
in which he complains to the others about not warning him he may be
locked up forever. Here, he makes another astonishing discovery—that
most of the patients are voluntary and can leave at any time. This leads
McMurphy to berate them for their timidity, encouraging them that
they are no more insane than the average person, and giving voice to
the picture’s main theme: freedom. McMurphy’s exhortation falls on
deaf ears, however, as the other patients remain preoccupied with their
Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest Midpoint Reversal
165
own petty issues. An errant cigarette leads to pandemonium and a fight
between Washington and McMurphy, in which the Chief comes to
VlcMurph/s aid. This hght further develops two relationships heading
in opposite directions; the antagonism between McMurphy and Wash¬
ington, and the budding friendship between McMurphy and the Chief.
The sequence ends with McMurphy's attempts to rectify his miscal¬
culation leading to disaster.
Sequence F: Electroshock Therapy
This ten-minute sixth sequence is centered on an event: the electro¬
shock therapy McMurphy suffers. It begins with a scene of prepara¬
tion_McMurphy, the Chief, and Cheswick are brought to a hitherto
unknown floor for some unknown purpose. The place is populated by
a large number of seriously disturbed patients, lending it a forbidding
aspect. As soon as CheswLck’s name is called, he becomes hysterical, re¬
inforcing the sense of impending doom.
While waiting his turn, McMurphy makes the third major discover)^
of the picture—that the Chief is neither deaf nor mute. McMurphy sug¬
gests to the Chief that they escape and head to Canada^ a dangling
cause that actually signals the end of the second act. The main tension
will McMurphy beat the system?—has been resolved in the negative,
and now he’s decided to escape the system altogether. The escape at¬
tempt is what prorhdes the tension for the third act.
After McMurph/s electroshock therapy, he reappears in the ward
looking like a lobotomized patient—a scene of preparation by contrast
that accentuates the subsequent revelation that he’s faking it. McMur-
phy s stunt also plants the motif of the lobotomy he later undergoes.
Sequence G: A Farewell Party ^
This sequence, at twenty-one minutes the longest in the picture, picks
up almost immediately on the dangling cause from the previous one—
McMurphy’s decision to escape. However, consistent with the leisurely
pacing of the previous sequences in the him. Sequence G is centered not
on the escape attempt but on a party. The fact that McMurphy s objec¬
tive is to escape, and that when the opportunity arises he not only
throws a party but arranges for Billy to Lose his virginity, is a stark dra-
matization of his basic '‘flaw''—his humanitarian impulse. It is not i
his character to leave without sharing the joy with others. ^
The sequence opens witli a television program revealing tlie time of
year—Christmas—and with Nurse Hatched bidding everyone good¬
night. Shortly after she leaves, McMurphy gets to work arranging his
escape by use of a phone call. He then awakens the Chief and alerts
him about his plans, but the latter reveals he's incapable of joining, and
provides third-act exposition about his own background and that of his
father how his father was crushed by society the way the doctors and
Nurse Hatched are trying to crush McMurphy. The conversation is both
a foreshadowing of what is in store for McMurphy and important infor¬
mation about the Chief that helps to define his character arc.
As soon as the women arrive, McMurphy begins to deal with the
orderly, Turkic, who provides the only obstacle to McMurphy's escape
plans. When Turkic is neutralized with bribes and booze, the way is
clear for McMurphy to flee, but he lingers instead and throws a party
for the ward. Like the fishing expedition, the party scene is explored for
Its comic aspects. Other than the underlying fear that the party may be
discovered thwarting McMurphy s escape attempt—there is little in
Figure 17. In Sequence G of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
McMurphy has everything he needs: an open window and nothing to stop
him from going through it. The film could reasonably end here, but his fatal
flaw his humanity—leads him to a very different destiny. (Frame enlarge^
Flew Overthe Cuckoo's Nest: Midpoint Reversal
167
the comedy does serve to set up by contrast the very
tragic events of the following sequence.
At last, when McMurphy begins to say his good-byes, the audience is
aiven its second glimpse of a reasonable end to the picture: McMurphy
succeeds in escaping. All the elements are there: Turkic is asleep, the
window is open, and he has two accomplices with a getaway car.
McMurphy’s farewell to Billy is what proves his undoing and pro¬
vides the reversal that plunges the film to its tragic end. After setting up
Billy with Candy and predicting that the event won't take long, a linger¬
ing aftermath scene occurs in which McMurphy falls asleep—an image
that ends the sequence.
Sequence H: The Morning After
The second-last sequence of the picture is unified by dramatic tension.
In this case, Nurse Hatched is the protagonist, and her objective is to
reassert authority over the waysvaid patients. It also brings Billy's sub¬
plot to a tragic resolution.
The sequence opens with a shot of the open window in bright day¬
light, conveying instantly the disaster that has befallen McMurphy: he's
fallen asleep and the prospects for his escape are now shattered, The
attendants and Nurses Hatched and Piibowsoon arrive and size up the
situation, Nurse Hatched orders the window closed, apparently sealing
McMurphy's fate.
The attendants soon discover Billy still in bed Mth Candy, Hatched
berates him and threatens to tell his mother about what he's done—
paying off the motif of her relationship with Billy's mother planted ear¬
lier.
AYhen Billy is dragged away kicking and screaming, McMurphy has
another opportunity to escape—by unlocking the window using keys
he’d stolen from Tuxkle, Even though' beb interrupted by Washington,
he still has one last chance to climb through the window when Nurse
Pilbow screams, McMurphy remains behind, and that opportunity
is lost forever. He attacks Nurse Hatched upon discovering that
Billy has killed himself; the sequence ends with an aftermath scene;
Hatched struggling to breathe after McMurphy has been pulled off of
her.
168
169
SCREErmRITlNG
Reversals
Novice screenwriters tend to fall into one of two camps: those who
center their work on character and write the screenplay based on
where the character seems to want to take it, and those who center
their wok on plot, and force the characters to adhere to that plot no
matter what. Scripts written under the first assumption risk being
vivid but shapeless, and under the latter, well-organized but empty.
The most successful approach to screenwhting is a combination of
the two, and the reversal is an example of that combination in ac¬
tion,
A screenplay must persuade the reader that its characters are
truly alive, so it is essential for a screenwriter to allow his or her
created characters total freedom to act in any manner true to the
characters’ nature. But while a screenwriter should not constrain a
character’s action, he or she does have complete control over the
circumstances around which a character acts, and clever manipula¬
tion of circumstances is what can make a character who is truly alive
adhere to the demands of plot.
An example of this action can be seen in Sequence H of Cuckoo’s
Nest, in the form of two reversals. On the night of the party, McMur-
phy has the window open and freedom In his grasp, and everything
about his character suggests that his desire to go through that win¬
dow will be irresistible—yet he hesitates. The reason is the circum¬
stances, namely, the untimely “good-bye" he says to Billy, whose
sexual innocence inspires him to delay his exit (thus the reversal).
The following morning, McMurphy again has the window open and a
car waiting outside, but again circumstances—this time in the form
of Bifly’s suicide—pull him back into the plot.
Some writers believe if they gwe a character total freedom, he or
she will leave the story and thus ruin the script. But an imaginative
screenwriter can always contrive the circumstances to get the char¬
acter back.
Sequence I: The Chief Flies Over the Cuckoo’s Nest
The final sequence of the picture centers on the Chief's escape from
the institution. It serves to resolve both the main story— McVLurphy's
fate—and one of the major subplots^ that of the Chief.
It begins with the various patients playing cards and discussing
McMurphy’s fate; two competing versions are heard—one, that he's es-
Qpe Fl ew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: Midpoint Reversal
caped, and two, that he’s '^upstairs’” and meek as a lamb. The Chief is
5 hown listening with concern, setting up his central role in the se¬
quence. As to the others, their relative complacency suggests that Mc¬
Murphy had no significant influence on them: no genuine change, and
no freedom, lies in their future.
That night, McMurphy is retunied to the ward, and the Chief tells
him he's ready to escape now, and was just waiting for his return before
doing so. The Chief quickly discovers that McMurphy has undergone a
lobotomy and has thus been destroyed. E.ather than leave him behind,
the Chief kills him, then carries on the work McMurphy had begun, by
using the plumbing fixture (which McMurphy had failed to lift earlier)
to shatter the wdndow and make his escape, paying off that significant
motif. There follows an aftermath scene—Taber screaming for joy—
before the final shot of the Chief maldng his way to freedom.
170
SCREENWRITINQ
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOOES NEST
Sequence Breakdown
Running
Seq. Description Length Time
ACTl
A Introduction of iocale; McMurpliy’s arrival, initial card 14:07 14:07
game and initial meeting with Dr. Spivey (includes (11%)
opening titles). Unifying Aspect: Action (McMurphys
arrival).
Point of attack: Dr, Spivey suggests that McMurphy is
faking insanity to get out of work duty.
B McMurphy has his first group therapy session, which 17:30 31:37
ends in chaos, tries to teach basketball to the Chief, (24%)
plays cards with the guys, confronts Nurse Ratched over
Ihe music, berates the others for being intimidated by
Nurse Ratched and makes a bet that he can ‘'put a bug
up her ass.” Unifying Aspect. Action (McMurphy getting
acquainted, especially with Nurse Ratched).
Predicament: McMurphy is going to try to persuade
the asylum staff that he's insane, and Nurse Ratched
will be his chief adversary.
ACT II
(Main tension: Will McMurphy beat the system—
will he stay at the asylum to avoid the work farm?)
C McMurphy tries to persuade Nurse Ratched to change 17:15 48:52
the work routine to allow them to watch the World (37%)
Series. The vote fails. McMurphy tries to lift a heavy
plumbing fixture and throw it through a wall so they
can go see the World Series; he fails. At the next therapy
session, he wins the vote only to have Ratched change
the rules on him. He pretends to watch the game with
the others. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension.
Frotagonist: McMurphy. Objective: To \vin the battle of
wills with Nurse Ratched over the World Series.
D McMurphy has a follow-up interview with Dr. Spivey 16:47 1:05:39
and the other psychiatrists; he complains about Nurse (50%)
Ratched. Spivey suggests that McMurphy is not
mentally ill. Afterward, McMurphy leads the group on
a fishing expedition in order to prove he’s insane.
Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Proragonist:
McMurphy. Objective: To convince Dr. Spivey that he’s
insane.
First Culmination: Bathing scene—McMurphy thinks
he’s only got 68 days left (1:10:32—54%),
p-jgw Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: Midpoint Reversal
171
^ McMurphy has succeeded in persuading Dr. Spivey to 13:51 1:19:30
keep him at the institution, but he soon discovers he (60%)
may never leave it. He complains at the next therapy
session to the others: a melee ensues. McMurphy’s
initial objective has now been achieved—he’s succeeded
in faking me.ntal illness—but the consequence is
unexpected and now he must reverse himself and try to
get out, not stay in. Unifying Aspect. Dramatic TeDsion.
Protagonist: McMurphy. Objective: To deal with the
consequence of his success in persuading the staff he is
insane.
p McMurphy discovers that the Chief is neither deaf nor 10:14 1:29:44
dumb. He vows they will somehow make their escape. (68%)
McMurphy, Cheswick, and the Chief gel shock therapy.
Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist:
McMurphy- Objective: To survive the shock therapy and
prepare for his escape.
Second Culmination: McMurphy sets escape plan in
motion by phoning Candy.
ACT III
G The main tension has been resolved—instead of trying 21:03 1:50:47
to beat the system, McMurphy has decided to escape it (84%)
entirely. The tension now shifts to: Mil this escape
attempt succeed? In this sequence, McMurphy sets up
his escape by means of the two women, then hangs
around to throw a going-away part)' for the other
patients. He does one more favor for Billy, then falls
asleep just as escape Is possible. Unifjnng Aspect. Event
(the farewell party).
H Nurse Ratched and the porters return to find the place U:31 2:02:LS
a shambles. She berates them, discovers Billy and Candy (93%)
together, threatens to tell Billy's mother on him. He
commits suicide; McMurphy loses his last chance to
escape and instead attacks Ratched. Unifying Aspect:
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Nurse Ratched.
Objective: Reassert control over the parents.
I McMurphy returns CO the ward bbotomHcd; the Chief 9:14 2:11:32
kills him as an act of mercy, then makes his escape. (100%)
Unifying Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Fretage-nist The
Chief. Objective: Escape.
Jfeso^ifriorrr McMurphy s irrepresribie spirit ha* cost
him his life, bat it lives on in the Chieft__
fo rce One: Eight Sequences Eight Miles Up
173
Air Force One: Eight
Sequences Eight Miies Up
In this 1997 film, screenwiter Andrew Marlowe and director Wolfgang
Petersen teamed to create a polished and sophisticated thriller that dem¬
onstrates effective use of the four main tools, with dramatic and ironic
tension building across the range of sequences. The protagonist, Presi¬
dent James Marshall, is also the protagonist of most of the sequences,
and his objectives are an escalating series of solutions to difficulties that
arise in. his battle of brawn and 'wit with the hijackers. The sequences
also carry two main subplots: the vice-president's drama with her sub¬
ordinates in Washington, and the release of General Radek from prison
in Russia.
Sequence A: Heading Home
The film begins with an action ^Teaser" that relies on pulling the audi¬
ence into the story through mystery—who are these paratroopers and
what do they want?—and enthralling them with rapid-fire action. This
teaser lasts three minutes, and by the time it is over, the audience is
ready for a solution to the mystery, which arrives in the form of a scene
at a banquet hall in Moscow, where the Russian premier describes the
capture of General Radek, and American President Marshall gives a
speech outlining his new ‘'get tough'' approach to dictators. Although
the initial action teaser has a very different subject matter and location
than the rest of Sequence A, it serves as a setup for the sequence: Presi¬
dent Marshall preparing to head back to the United States and pursue
their new policy with. Congress and the American people.
The sequence is unified by that action: the movement of Marshall
and his entourage to Air Force One. Along the way, most of the princi¬
pal characters are introduced, including the first family, the national se¬
curity advisor, chief of staff, and deputy press secretary. The sequence
is propelled forward through the tools of telegraphing and dangling
causes: Marshall urging his national security advisor to '"get behind” his
new policy, and a warning from his advisors about a frosty reception in
Congress. Meanwhile, the deputy press secretary lays out an itinerary
for the Russian journalists, and later the president lays out his plans for
watching a Notre Dame football game. These elements of the future
serve the function of preparation by contrast—setting the audience up
for a mundane political story that never actually transpires. The plane
takes off just as Marshall joins his staff for a meeting, bringing the se¬
quence to a close.
Sequence B: “How the hell did they get Air Force One?”
The second sequence picks up on a subtle dangling cause established in
the first one: when the Russian news crew is introduced in Sequence A,
its leader, a man later revealed to be Ivan Korshunov, questions a secur¬
ity official about why they need to have their bags inspected after they'd
already done so. This is the first hint of a dark intent on the part of
Korshunov, revisited and reinforced early in the second sequence when
he looks at his watch and takes a furtive glance from a comrade next to
him. Shortly after this, Gibbs, one of the secret service agents, murders
three colleagues and sets the hijacking in motion. Gibbs's duplicity es¬
tablishes a line of ironic tension that persists until the final few minutes
of the film,
When the hijacking begins, the dramatic tension of the fifteen-min¬
ute sequence is established. Korshunov is the prota-gonist, and his objec¬
tive is to hijack the plane and take the president hostage.
The chaotic hijadcing scene presents the audience with its first
glimpse of a reasonable outcome to the picture: that the plane lands at
Ramstein Air Base and the hijacking ft thwarted. Indeed, as the plane
descends toward Ramstein. KorsliunO'V reinforces what is at stake: if the
plane lands, they are finished, The plane actually does land, but the hi-
— 172 —
174
screenwriti ng
jackers are able to lift it back into the air^ completing a significant rever¬
sal in the narrative.
As soon as the plane is airborne again and the tension thus resolved.
Korshunov is told the president is no longer on board, having escaped
in the pod. Carefully selected camera angles, which suggest the president
has indeed escaped without actually showing him inside the pod, set up
the second significant reversal in the sequence: that the president in fact
never left the plane at all. When he is revealed to be still on board, both
the second sequence and first act are brought to an end. All the principal
characters have been introduced, Marshall has been established as the
protagonist, and his objective is clear: he must defeat the hijackers and
rescue the hostages. The fact that Marshall is still on board and the hi¬
jackers donh know it creates a line of dramatic irony as well, irony that
parallels the main tension and is resolved along with the main tension
at the end of Act IL
Sequence C: Marshall Gets His Gun
This thirteen-minute sequence is unified by dramatic tension: President
MarshalPs attempt to get a weapon and free the hostages. As is typical,
its tension is very nearly that of the main tension of the picture as a
whole. Soon after the sequence opens, Korshunov contacts Vice-Presi¬
dent Kathryn Bennett and reveals his intention—a demand for the re¬
lease of General Radek—and utters a threat—that he will execute one
hostage eveiy thirty minutes until his demand is met. This deadline cre¬
ates anticipation for the duration of the sequence and into the next one.
After the conversation with Korshunov, the dramatic tension sur¬
rounding Marshall's hiding on the plane is partially resolved: the vice-
president is told that the pod is empty. This leads to speculation that
the president is still alive and a stowaway on Air Force One; one of the
American generals tells the vice-president that they have the element of
surprise on their side, and that Marshall may be their best chance—a
dangling cause that hooks directly into the following scene, which finds
Marshall beginning to move about secretly in the plane.
Marshall makes his way to the main deck, where he tries to make a
phone call but finds the line disconnected. The film then switches back
to Washington, where the vice-president and her advisors weigh the
pros and cons of releasing Radek, developing further that subplot. The
. of authority is raised in the course of the conversation, initiating
’Tsubplot of political authority and succession in Washington,
* TW scene then switches hack to Marshall, who plays a cat-and-
p with one of the hijackers before ambushing him and seiz
””r.fuTA * s pot i. given . second ^ilmpse of .
ih eCcLe to the picture-Marshall, now armed, has the keys to
possible outcom F
™ IS thwarted by one of the hijackers, though, and in a
Sc tvetl he winds np being hnn.ed .8.in efter bri,% e„,op,ng
"“TTstuent ends w.th Mershnll escpinj to the baggage cnmp.rl-
a3 bn' «be™» ssnia.ed and on .be defensive, Ins e„st.oce,
if not his identity, [mown to the hijackers.
Seqii^nc6 D: Marshall Calls For Help
The fourth sequence immediately picks up on the deadline from
J^^onele .ecntmn
rnS^altGratisor before ordering the First Lady and her
daughter to come with him. The sequence itself is unified ^
Marshall his
rr:i.r.:i;:.^^p.sv=n^bPe„n.s,,eas^
tions observed in other films analyred m ^htyolr^e^Sa, U do P ^
vide at least a subtle glimpse of the resolution, rvUh the preside
charge of the nation again after narrovsdy escaping harm.
Sequence E: The Fuel Dump
This thirteen-minute sequence begins with a dangling cause: President
Marshall telling the vice-president that “weVe got to get this plane on
the ground.” Marshall quickly settles on the means by which he plans
to achieve dais end when he sees some milk leaking from a carton and
gets the idea of draining the aircraft of fuel. His attempt to initiate a
“fuel dump,” and the hijackers' countermeasures, provide the dramatic
tension that unifies the sequence.
Soon after Marshall starts to pursue his objective, an obstacle
arises—Korshunov's attempt to smoke him out by threatening to kill
the deputy press secretary. Marshall refuses to show himself, resulting
in her execution; this causes him to redouble his efforts. He succeeds in
cutting the appropriate wires widi the help of technicians in the United
States, resolving the dramatic tension of the sequence. Very quicldy,
though, he has to fight off a counterattack by Korshunov's men, who
shoot their way into the avionics suits and stop the fuel dump. The se¬
quence thus ends with only a partial victory by the protagonist.
Sequence F: Parachutes
The sixth sequence, which is roughly the same length as the previous
three at just over twelve minutes, is unified by dramatic tension once
again: Marshall's desire to get the hostages off the aircraft using the
parachutes. The sequence begins with a surprise twdst—Marshall is re¬
vealed to be holding a hijacker at gunpoint. Using the hijacker's keys,
Marshall succeeds at last in reaching the hostages. This positive develop¬
ment is tempered by dramatic irony: the first person Marshall gives a
weapon to is none other than Gibbs, the man the audience knows is a
traitor.
The president briefs the others on the situation—he’d tried to get the
plane down but the hijackers plan to refuel. One of his subordinates,
Major Caldwell, immediately suggests they can use the refueling as an
occasion to get the plane to a low enough altitude and speed to allow
escape by way of parachutes. Although this will not solve all the prob-
lems—the First Lady and daughter are still held hostage—it will result
in a substantial victory for Marshall. The first obstacle to the plan is
Marshall’s inability to contact Washington secretly in order to relay the
speed and altitude instructions; this is quickly solved by a female subor-
suesests using a fax line instead. The secrecy surrounding
adds a new layef of dramatic irony to the sequence on top of
dramatic tension; the hijackers must be kept in the dark about the
f/^r 1 -he lower altitude refueling.
"Th?‘second act” of the sequence thus begins, with Marshall and t e
J H'nate making their way to the fax machine and sending it while
C Tett of the hostages sneak to the lower leyel of the plane. The
through to the Situation Room in Washington, but in a y®
5 eS ta it is shoum arriving unnoticed, and the plot hands of m
u hnC about political succession-thus delaying the answer to the
subplot about polit e anyone will get the word about the para-
question of fax machine in the Situation
SrthTwee-president is briefed by the attorney general about the
tential incapacity of the president, putting her in charge. He further
teUs her that the president is regarded as incapacitated rf a majority o
he cabin^ agLs to this-a dangling cause that is picked up m Se¬
quence G. The film then switches to a news conference, further e aying
le resolution of the question of whether or not the fax was read.
Ba k on the plane, parachutes are handed out and the tanker arrives
to Sil Air Force One. Suspense about the fax instructions persist as
k httS wtch the altitude and airspeed readouts, The suspense rs
Solved at laT to audible sighs of relief from the hostages, when the
plane be^m^ MajL Caldwell tries m hand a parachuteyo
Marshall, who refuses, insisting he 11 stay until his fami y is le
danding cause picked up in the following sequence.
Most of the hostages succeed in making thyr ^!^ °kVthiee
hijacker, manages to disrupt the escape and take the pres.d.n and three
„’bo,dinat.s-one of whom ,s the turncoat albs-pnsonen ^ cap¬
ture of Marshall marks the end of the sequence and second act. The
„«ntension-will Marshall succeed In Y'’Sts dri n
mu the hostages?—has been resolved ambiguously; he has succeyed m
“fell: most of the hostages but faded to defeat ^ Ini^aS
himself in even greater danger. The tension now shifts to Marshalt
own survival and that of his- family.
Sequence G; “Get off my plane!”
This sktee-mtate sequence ts nniHed by Marshalls
Korshunov and free himself and his f.mrly. It begrns with Korshuno
178
screenwriting
threatening to murder the president’s family if he doesn’t cooperate;
after he’s roughed up a bit, Marshall falls to the ground, hands taped
behind his back, and sees a shard of broken glass—a moment that pro¬
vides the end of the “first act” of the sequence: he will try to use the
glass to free himself, and, thus free, attack Korshunov.
Korshunov lays out his demands, and the president, under threat of
having his daughter shot, agrees to contact the Russian president to try
to get Radek freed. This act marks a shift now to the second major sub¬
plot—the release of Radek and the Russian politics this involves. As
soon as Radek’s release is effected, the story shifts to the other major
subplot—the political succession in the United States, where the vice-
president is presented with a petition to declare Marshall incapacitated
and put herself in command. This actually amounts to a skillful integra¬
tion of all three subplots, since the vice-president, once empowered,
might rescind the request to release Radek, putting Marshall and his
family back in mortal danger.
The vice-president ultimately refuses to sign, and Radek is released.
His freedom is soon enough threatened, though, when Marshall man¬
ages to cut the tape that binds him and jump Korshunov. Marshall s
victory in the scuffle that follows marks the culmination of the se¬
quence—Marshall kills two of the remaining three hostages and is now
in pursuit of the last one—Korshunov—who still holds his ^vife hostage.
The General Radek subplot adds an additional layer of suspense byway
of a deadline set up by Korshunov, who declares that he will not let the
First Lady go until General Radek is safely away from the prison. Mar¬
shall’s battle with Korshunov thus becomes more than a fight to save
his wife’s life, it is also a race against time to save die world from the
rise of a nuclear-armed dictator and a collapse of Russia back into Com¬
munism. The use of sound makes the race more emphatic: while Mar¬
shall pursues Korshunov, inmates can be heard at Radek’s prison
singing the Communist anthem, the “Internationale.”
Marshall manages to catch up to Korshunov, who holds a gun to the
First Lady’s head and forces Marshall to disarm. Korshunov then tosses
away the last parachute and warns Marshall that there is no one left to
fly the plane, and no parachutes, so he cannot win. This dangling cause
is picked up in the final sequence, where the issue of surviving in the
crippled aircraft becomes the remaining dramatic issue.
With the timely help of his wife, Marshall manages to kill Korshu¬
nov, and with his death the two major subplots are resolved: Radek is
killed, and the issue of political succession in the United States is ren¬
dered moot. With Radek’s death, the sequence draws to a close.
Mr f orce One: Eight Sequences Eight Miles
179
sequence H: Air Strip Strike Team To The Rescue
The final sequence runs sixteen minutes and has as its unif)dng elemey
Marshall's attempt to get himself and his fellow passengers safe y on the
eround The antagonist of the picture is dead, but the storytellers have
carefully preserved one hidden opponent: the traitorous secret service
aeent Gibbs, who remains alive and ready to sabotage this final survival
effort. The difference between Korshunov and Gibbs, of course, is that
Gibbs is a danger the president does not see, but the audience does.
Soon after the president takes control of the plane, the first obstacle
gnses—enemy fighters attempting to bring down the plane, Once this
is overcome rvith the help of friendly fighters, the next obstacle asserts
itself; damage sustained by Air Force One during the aerial combat
seems to be fatal.
There follows a quick recapitulation scene in the situation room
the plane is uncontrollable, the engines are failing and it’s losing fue ,
At this point one of the military officers asks whether or not a plane on
the map is the "Air Strip Strike Team.” Upon confirmation of this, he
replies, "1 just had a wild idea”—a dialogue hook into the next scene,
which finds a hitherto unseen plane approaching Air Force One.
A quick cutaway to a news reporter at the White House fills in some
needed exposition: a daring mid-air rescue is being contemplated. This
rescue attempt occupies the action for the remainder of the picture.
The remaining dramatic tension—a race to see if t e presi ent an
passengers can get off the plane before it ciashes-is intensified by dra-
Ltlc Lny spawned by the presence of Gibbs, who may betray the
whole operation at any moment. With only time for one escapee left,
Gibbs finally asserts himself and murders Major Caldwell and one of
the rescuers before Marshall is able to subdue him and make it to the
rescue plane safely. A brief epilogue involves the announcement that he
rescue plane is now "Air Force One.”
180
SCREENWRITjNG
AIR FORCE ONE
Sequence Breakdown
Seq. Description
ACT I
A Opening titles and action teaser: Gen. Radek is
captured, Then, in Moscow, President Marshall delivers
a foreign policy speech, surprising his advisors and the
rest of the world. He and his entourage head bade to Air
Force One for the return trip, and he discusses his new
policy with them, and what it might portend for their
careers. Unifying Aspect. Action (preparing to return
home on Air Force One).
B Ivan Korshunov and his band of retrograde
CojTUTiunists take over plane, but fail to get President,
who remains on board. Unifying Aspect: Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist Korshunov. ObjectiveiTo takeover
the plane.
Point of attack: Secret Service guy shoots colleagues
on plane.
Predicament: President Marshall is hiding on a plane
that has been hijacked and must act to save his ow3i
life and that of everyone else on board.
ACT II
(Main tension: Will Marshall he able to defeat the hijackers
and rescue the hostages?)
C Marshall surveys his situation, plays hide and seek, 13:21 47:00
succeeds in beating up one of tire hijackers ajid seiz-ing (40%)
his weapon. He then makes an escape into the luggage
compartment. Meanwhile Korshunov makes his
demands about the release of Radek. Unifying Aspect
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Marshall. Objective: To
size up the situation, get armed, and free the hostages.
D Korshunov executes the first hostage. Marshall tries to 13:14 1:00:14
reach the White House by phone, then is momentarily (51%)
captured, and conspires to make the plane take evasive
maneuvers against a guided missile to defeat his captor.
Unifying Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagonist.
Marshall. Objective: To escape from his captor.
First Culmination: Marshall succeeds in subduing his
captor and contacting Washington.
E Marshall succeeds in gettingtbe plane to dump fuel, but 13:07 1;13;21
one of Korshunov’s men is able to stop it. Unifying (62%)
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Marshall.
Objective: To dump fuel so as to bring the plane down.
]: 24:42
(73%)
P Marshall succeeds in getlmg most of the hostages off
^ plane vhth the parachutes, then gets caught Unifying
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagomsf. Marshall,
Objective-. To get the hostages free by using the
parachutes.
Second Culmination: Marshall has succeeded in ^
getting everyone off except his family, but now he s
been captured.
ACT III
r Main tension has been resolved ambigously-Marshall 16'.09 WhSl
has succeeded in resening most of the hostages but he /oj
his family, and a few close advisors are now prisoner. A
new tension arises: can he overcome his captivity by
Korshunov and escape? fnthis seqnence
Korshunov’s demands, but is betrayed and fights pek.
After a bitter fight, Korshunov is killed in the bach of
the plane, and Radek is gunned down before he can
make his way to freedom. Unifying Aspedr Dramatic
Tension. Pretagonist. Marshall. OhjecUve: To defeat
Korshunov and thus save his life and that of his fimi y
and subordinates,
H Marshall Cakes over the controls, outlasts an attack by 16:30
enemy fighters, and manages to hold the plane in the air
while another plane comes to effect a rescue^ After a ks
fight with traitorous secret service agent Gibbs he
succeeds in getting off the plane and is rennited with his
family in safety. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tens,on.
Vrotagonht. Marshall. Objective: To get himself and his
family and subordinates safely off ibe plane.
R^,olution: Marshall aadthe others escape to the
second plane._ _ _ —
Being John Malkovich: The
Disappearing Lead Actor
Upon initial viewing, this 1999 independent film seems a complete
break from traditional storytelling, described by critics variously as
“weird to the maxf' “different from anything that came before it/' and
“wonderful and inspired weirdness/’ A closer look reveals a remarkably
imaginative use of very traditional storytelling patterns and a carefully
crafted film in which the storytelling is enhanced by cinematographic
and art direction choices and attention to performances. The perception
of “weirdness” is a testament to the flexibility of the tools presented in
this volume, and is not, in this case, an abandonment of them.
The protagonist of the film is readily identifiable as Craig, and pur¬
suit of his desire—Maxine—is what shapes the action. The means by
which Craig plans to pursue his relationship with Maxine is the portal
into lohn Malkovich's head—a strategy set up thirty-five minutes
(33%) into the film—a long setup by typical standards but not overly
so. The chief obstacles he encounters in pursuit of Maxine are compli¬
cations resulting from the relationship that develops between Craig’s
wife and Maxine. The main tension—will Craig get Maxine through use
of the portal?—is resolved to the positive an hour and forty-five min¬
utes (81%) of the way through the film, when Craig succeeds in taking
over Malkovich’s body and he and Maxine wind up getting married.
The third act explores the implications and complications of this rela¬
tionship and its eventual destruction. The resolution finds Maxine and
Lotte together and Craig “absorbed” in Maxine’s child—condemned to
— 182 —
1 1 Unt Viave no control over what she does. The
look through her eyes Maxine's use of the Malkouicl por-
„,i„, sohpiol. ,n.ol.e ^ truth about M.x-
■tXat^'7u;S":ii.y for h,»e,f and h.s ft.enhs
*TC77ay°™etight-sequerire stmctuie is readily apparent, *e
tk'nsr uD the situation, the next four exploring the succession
mSons Aat result from Craig’s pursuit of his desire, the sev-
of comp 1 pv-nloTation of the implications of Craig s
entb P/7 p the last centering on Craig’s decisioir to giy
for the sake of Maxine, In addition, extensive use is inade
Sofottools discussed in this volunre: dramatic and conric irony, dan^
gliug causes, appointments, and deadlines.
Sequence A; Craig tries to get a job
The opening of the picture is both
plored in this volume m its use of a pux
of a do“ up’fSrturaVufto bo puppet.). It i. al.o unusual
ra7:U in J tnlbaf .one esiab,.*^
tense, and disturbing, and the , / / , suggestion
Xtatg's Dance of 7t«C„^Ld a.
S7‘'h,‘S ::.:i»P7 Saiya
dance that is paid off much later. sequence is established
Afte, the tT, 7 uS th. "puppeteetinp
qnickly. lotte aug§es tafantiru—an apparent
thing turns around,/ p . ,e also learn that Lotte
nval-doesn’t nyd a day pfo Elijah .vho is
works at a pet store, and 1 Elijah—a dan-
apparently not feeling well, Lotte asksyraig
glmg cause that ^^/iStapLnVto /eCatehing television when a
In the next scene, 7 / 77/7^^^- on-quicUy paying
report about a new exp ^ V to
Sb! rid tel377,. hn„ W he n that he hex no con.cou.-
184
SCREENWRITJNG
ness—the misconception being a major motif in the picture, and an as¬
sumption of Craig’s that proves wrong later at a critical moment in
Sequence E, when Elijah overcomes his childhood trauma to untie
Lotte.
In the next scene, Craig attempts to make money doing his puppetry
on a street corner, and gets punched in the face for his trouble. He
shows up at Lotte’s pet shop with a bruised lip in the next scene, and at
this point the end of the “first act” of the sequence arrives: Craig will
set out to find a day job.
In the next scene he pores over the want ads and, failing to find any
openings for puppeteers, locates an ad for Lester Corp. Craig circles the
ad—a visual book that links the scene to the next, which finds Craig
walking down a city street and entering an office building. Craig locates
the company on the 7^h floor, and presents himself to Floris, the recep¬
tionist, who has difficulty understanding what he’s saying—a verbal
motif that is paid off as a running gag throughout the rest of the picture.
Soon, Craig is called in to the interview with Mr, Lester, who gives
him some simple and somewhat nonsensical tests before hiring him. At
the end of the scene, Craig asks why the ceilings are so low; Lester tells
him that will be covered in orientation—a dialogue hook binding the
scene to the next one. The tension of the opening sequence is thus re¬
solved—Craig has secured a job—and the remaining four minutes of
the sequence deal with the consequence of his hire—his orientation by
means of the video presentation. Although presented as a gag, the orien¬
tation video provides important exposition about Captain Mertin, paid
off late in the second act.
The orientation segment also introduces Maxine, who becomes the
focus of Sequence B.
Sequence B: Craig Goes After Maxine
The twenty-minute second sequence has as its unifying element the dra¬
matic tension surrounding Craig’s pursuit of Maxine. It begins with an
economical expository scene involving Craig and Lotte preparing din¬
ner; the exposition is so subtly smuggled in it takes effort to notice it.
The scene begins with a (presumably) upstairs neighbor pounding on
the floor complaining about the noise of the animals, and his words are
echoed by the various birds, revealing an ongoing situation. As the two
prepare dinner, they are facing away from each other, a visual cue that
R em Malkovich:Jhe Disappearing Lead Actor_
185
their relationship is strained, This is reinforced ^rbally by Qaig s ap
parent lack of interest m what Lotte has to say about the Elpah
L IS seeing a shrink in an effort to deal with some sort of cyidhoo
trauma-which is a further setup for Elijah’s heroic deed in ^quence
E) and his negative response to Lotte's query about having a babj (le-
^ealing hei own yearning). Craig’s reply, that he thinks it s best they
wait to see how his “job thing pays off,” is a dangling cause that hooks
the scene into the next one, which takes place at Lester Coip.
Here, Craig tries to strike up a conversation with Ma»ne, and she
immediately interprets it as an attempt to hit on her, which she re u .
Craig is next shown working his job; Floris makes a pass at him using
indirection: maybe he could alphabetize her. He tells her he s in love
with someone else, and she misinterprets what he says— anothet varia-
tion on the speech-impediment gag. • > ■ +
At this point. Lester arrives and in turn misinterprets Craig s interac¬
tion with Floris, warning hint not to toy ivith her. During this brief con¬
versation, Lester reveals his lust for Ploris (after an oblique reference to
it in the job interview scene) and the fact that he is 105 years old. Thus,
after seventeen minutes, the two major motifs of the picture aie sue
Praia makes a pass ai Maxine in the second sequence of
Maicb(1999) Craig'spursuitof herlove provides the unify-
the sequence and underiies the main tension o
thtfilm She is introduced just after the tension of the firstsequence
Craig find employment?—is resolveci, (Frame enlargement)
cinctly set forth: lust and immortality, the lust corresponding primarily
to the plot and the immortality informing the “C"’ plot of Lester's
quest to leap to the 'vessel body.” The scene ends with the establish¬
ment of an appointment: Lester invites Craig to join him for a drink at
Jerry's Juiceteria after work, to further discuss Lester's sexual fantasies.
Craig’s pursuit of Maxine resumes in the following scene, in which
he hoodwinks her into a date. The scene ends with another appoint¬
ment; she instructs him to meet her at the Stuffed Pig at seven o’clock;
if he's late, she'll walk.
The next scene finds Craig and Lester at the Juiceteria, with Lester at
the tail ejid of an erotic story. With seven o’clock approaching, Craig
excuses himself, but not before Lester makes another appointment with
him: a dinner date with Craig and his wife for that Thursday. Craig
quickly makes his way to the bar where he meets Maxine, who quickly
rebuffs him again, this time when he reveals he's a puppeteer.
Craig now returns home, in a scene that is the first in the film to use
dramatic irony: Craig conceals from Lotte his interest in Maxine. Lotte
explains she spent the day feeding all the animals—a subtle reminder of
her desire for a child—and then announces that the chimp will sleep
with them that night—another indication of a strained marital relation¬
ship.
Craig retires to his workshop, where the puppets are used by tlie sto¬
rytellers to make visible his inner state—his obsessive lust for Maxine.
He dresses one of his puppets as Maxine, and leaves a puppet resem¬
bling Lotte hanging off to the side. After a brief shot of Lotte lying in
bed alone, the film returns to Craig's workshop, where Craig acts out,
using the Maxine puppet and one resembling himself, a love scene as
he would like to live it. He also describes to '"Maxine” that puppeteering
is simply being inside someone else’s skin for a while—a setup for the
later discovery of the Malkovich portal.
Craig's success in seducing Maxine in the puppet play provides a
contrast to the reality portrayed in the following scene, when Craig tries
out the same lines on the real Maxine and is rebuffed once more.
This brings about the apparent resolution to the sequence—Craig
fails to get Maxine, After a brief aftermath scene in which Craig absorbs
the reality of the rejection, he discovers the Malkovich portal, experi¬
ences Malkovich finishing breakfast and taking a cab ride (in which the
''jewel thief movie” verbal motif is planted), and is then dumped near
the New Jersey Turnpike.
Craig returns to Maxine’s office, where he explains to her the strange
adventure. She is wholly unimpressed, and walks out on him. She calls
Malkovich: The Disappearing Lead
187
, 3 t his home, though, md suggests they go into business together to
money off the portal. Craig asks her whether it might be danger
to toy with something so profound—a dangling cause yoked up
and developed throughout the rest of the picture. Maxine seduces him
into accepting pst as Lotte enters the apartment, adding a layei of dra
niatic irony that punctuates the scene.
Sequence C: The Lotte Complication
Craig’s acceptance of Maxine’s offer to go into business is the dangling
cause that binds the second sequence with the third, and this, coup e
with her statement that Craig is her “man on the inside, constUnto
the end of first act. The protagonist is clear, and so is his oVctive
j^,^ine-his means to getting her-the Malkovnch portal-and the ob-
rfades—Maxine’s reluctance and Craig’s relationship with Lotte. These
three aspects of dramatic tension inform the rest of the picture,
Sequence C, which runs just under smteen imnutesy icks up on bmh
dangling causes-the lust and the business angle—and is unified by the
tensfon created by Craig attempting to avoid Lotte s becoming suspi¬
cious about his budding relationship with Maxine, After this ts resolved
Figure 19 The four main ingredients of Being John Malkovich 11999)
united in one moment at the erd, of Sequence B: Craig is on the phone
with Maxine, discussing turning Me Malkovich
enterprise, while Lotte is in the background, unawaie The mam tension o
the picture is established here. (Raine enlargement)
with a surprise twist, the remainder of the sequence involves the first
customer, which is the shift to the “B” subplot. ^
terh Lotte en route to dinner at Les^
place, picking up on the appointment established in the previous
sequence Dramatic irony is at play; he tells her he’ll be working late
ights and justifies It by telling her about the money he’ll make; Ltii-
douhdVr''" ' u he plans those nights, which will
oubtless be pursuing his relationship with Maxine. Lotte voices skepti-
asm about the idea of a portal, and asks to try it out-suggestinX
this would also be a way to meet Craig’s partner, which plays on Craig’s
. Craig offers to take her right now, on the way to Lester’s”—a
dialogue hook leading into the following scene, which finds Craig
swinging open the portal door. ®
Lotte gathers the nerve to go into the portal, and gets inside John
Malkovich while he ,s taking a shower. Afterward she is completely
overwhelmed by the experience and wants to do it again He protest!
th' ! 711 into the following scene
hich finds Craig and Lotte dining on an obviously Spartan meal of
greens and juices at Lester's place.
During dinner, Lotte, traveling to the rest room, instead stumbles
rTomsXr lX:
, . ■ ^ thyide home, she asks Craig about what he thinks might
be the connection between Lester and Malkovich, He doubts there is
pomit “L" to sex-speculating about whether the
porHl IS some sort of vagma. The fact that she does not bother to teU
Craig about the shrme in Lester’s house amounts to storytelling sleight
miit ■ 7 r' wouldn’t she share this informatin that
rioXoTd ! “ the mforma-
on would turn it into a mystery stoiy. undermining the sexual/rela-
t onship direction m which the story actually develops. Thus the
orHelkrs use Lotte s sexual references to distract the audience from
ogtc of hei actions, and the mystery aspect is safely submerged
until late m tire second act, "wigeu
The film now swjches to the offices of Lester Corp., where Craig and
M^ne write an ad for their new business venture. Lotte interrupts their
intimate meeting, exploiting again Craig’s fear of discovery of his inter¬
est m Maxme, Lotte tells Craig she wants to do the M^lkovichX
again, confessing to him that the experience has convinced her she’s a
XTlotte ride.
IiouTmI TT f ^ as she’s
alone. Maxine calls a friend to get Malkovich’s home number,
B eing John Malkovich: The Disappearing Lead Actor _ 189
The him switches to Malkovich alone at home rehearsing a play, and
soon we discover that Lotte is already inside him, en] 0 )dng the experi¬
ence of his masculinity. The phone rings and Maxine is on the other
end) attempting to persuade him to meet her, in the process paying off
the '‘jewel thief movie” gag for a second time. He resists the impulse,
but Lotte urges him on, and at last he writes down the appointment:
Bernardo's at eight o'clock. In addition to the dramatic tension of the
scene—Maxine’s attempt to persuade Malkovich to go to the restau¬
rant—dramatic irony is also at work, since Malkovich doesn't know that
Lotte is “inside'' him.
Afterward, Lotte tells Craig that she needs to go back to the portal at
exactly eight o’clock that night, a dialogue hook leading into the follow¬
ing scene, which finds Malkovich waiting at a restaurant. Maxine ar¬
rives, and Lotte is indeed inside Malkovich, and both Malkovich and
Lotte seem to hit it off with Maxine.
Afterward, in the car with Craig, Lotte lies about her experience,
claiming Malkovich was just hanging around his apartment during her
“trip,” and thus introducing another layer of dramatic irony, The scene
resolves the tension of the sequence; what had been a question about
whether or not Lotte would discover Craig’s budding romance with
Maxine has been transformed into a question of whether or not Craig
will discover Lotte s ersatz affair with Maxine through Malkovich. Dur¬
ing their conversation, Craig offers her advice that touches on the theme
of the picture—switching bodies will not solve her problems. It is, of
course, advice he should take himseif. At the end of the scene, a dan¬
gling cause is initiated by Lotte—that they should invite Maxine over
for dinner. This dangles through the next scene, which focuses on the
“B” subplot—the business Maxine and Craig are running—and is not
picked up again until the following sequence. In the “B” plot scene, the
first customer arrives and takes an exhilarating trip on the “Malkovich
ride.”
Sequence D: Lotte's Affair
This short sequence picks up imniediateiy the dangling cause from two
scenes prior—Maxine is over at Craig's and Lotte^s for dinner. It is uni¬
fied by dramatic teii.sion—Lotte's desire to pursue her relationship with
Maxine.
190
191
screenwriting
The dinner scene is informed primarily by dramatic irony—both
Craig and Lotte are in love with Maxine, and neither knows about the
other s interest. That ironic tension is resolved when both Craig and
Lotte lunge for Maxine while she sits on the couch. Maxine immediately
rej^ects Craig, and is willing to accept Lotte only when she’s “in Maikov-
ich. A wordless aftermath ensues, with Craig and Lotte sharing the
couch but not looking at each other.
The film now switches to J.M. Inc,, where Maxine receives a call from
Lotte asking her to meet after work so they can initiate an affair— an
action that picks up on the dangling cause of the scene before. Maxine
agrees, creating an appointment for 4:11 that morning. Craig is shown
alone in bed, a shot that echoes that of Lotte lying alone in bed in .Se¬
quence B. This scene constitutes the first culmination—Craig is alone
in bed—he doesn’t have Maxine or his puppeteering career, and as such
is the mirror opposite of the second culmination, when he has both
Malkovich greets Maxine at his door, and the two wait on the couch
until precisely 4:11, at which time they begin to make passionate love.
The scene is intensified by the dramatic irony of Lotte’s secret presence
mside Malkovich. Maxine’s request that she call Malkovich “Lotte” al¬
most exposes the secret, but Malkovich winds up accepting this as an
eccentricity.
A brief post-coital aftermath scene follows, with Lotte lying ecstatic
by the side of the New Jersey Turnpike, before she arrives home and
confesses her affair with Maxine. The sequence is resolved: Lotte has
successfully realized her affair with Maxine.
Sequence E: Malkovich Threatens
This seventeen-minute sequence resolves temporarily Craig’s problem
in the mam plot, then shifts almost entirely to the subplot of the busi¬
ness venture, which is tlrreatened by Malkovich’s suspicions about Max-
me. It begins witli Craig assaulting Lotte in their apartment and forcing
her to make a date with Maxine, resulting in an appointment one hour
hence^ after this, Craig ties her up and puts her in a cage with Elijah
the chimp. ’
Maxine tracks down Malkovich at a stage rehearsal, and the two soon
wind up at his apartment having sex. It is quickly revealed that Craig is
mside Malkovich, adding another layer of ironic tension to the scene'
not only is Malkovich unaware that someone is “inside” him, but Max~
^ei ng-fohn Malkovich: The Disappearing Lead Actor
ine is unaware that Craig has taken Lotte's place “inside” Malkovich.
To Craig's surprise, he realizes he can control Malkovich somewhat.
Malkovich realizes he's losing control of his own body and becomes
frightened.
Craig goes home to celebrate his newfound power, and brags to Lotte
that soon Malkovich will be just another puppet in his hands—a dan¬
gling cause that is picked up and developed emphatically during the rest
of the picture.
The movie now switches to Malkovich, who confers with Charlie
Sheen about his unnerving experience with Maxine, The scene is sus¬
tained with dramatic tension—Malkovich ranting about his situation
and Charlie trying to calm him down. In the end, Malkovich tells him
he’s got to get to the truth, a dangling cause that provides the central
tension of the sequence,
The next scene picks up on this dangling cause: Malkovich is shown
waiting furtively outside Maxine's apartment building. He follows her
cab to the 7 V 2 floor, where he discovers j.M. Inc. and confronts Craig
and Maxine. Malkovich insists on going through the portal himself.
This leads to a scene of preparation, in which retardation is used. A
considerable amount of anticipation is created around the question
posed by Craig; what happens when a man goes through his own portal?
For the first time since Craig’s initial journey, the lead-up to the “trip”
is drawn out. Vlalkovich is shown slowly making his way through the
tunnel till the telltale squish of the mud is heard, He is then thrust down
the tunnel at high speed, and the payoff, thus delayed, has considerable
impact: Malkovich finds himself in a world densely populated exclu¬
sively With other John Malkoviclies of various sizes, ages, genders, and
attire.
Malkovich flees from this world and winds up by the New Jersey
Turnpike, where he confronts Craig and warns him that he will take
legal action to seal the portal—a dangling cause that is closed oft w'hen
Craig later succeeds In taking control of Malkovich completely.
The sequence abruptly switched back to the main plot, with Craig
home to feed the animals and arguing with the still-caged Lotte, In an
effective use of preparation by contrast, Craig begins, apparently, to re¬
ject his course of action, regretting that he has locked hrs wife up in a
cage wondering if he's become a monster. Lotte tries to soothe him with
words. He tells her he loves her ^^eiT much, opens the cage door^ and
dials the phone, The him cuts away to Maxine alone at J.M. Inc., who
answers the phone and speaks to Lotte, agreeing to meet her an hour
192
SCR£ENWRIH Ng
hence. The impression is that Craig has come to his senses and freed his
wife. The reality is just the opposite, revealed in the following shot,
where Lotte is shown tied and gagged in the cage after aJl.
At this point, Elijah the Chimp has a flashback replaying trauma he
suffered during his capture. Working through this memory enables the
chimp to free Lotte from her bonds, completing his character arc, and
paying off the exposition about his therapy aimed at dealing with child¬
hood trauma.
Lotte immediately calls Maxine and tells her about Craig's actions,
but in a surprise twist, Maxine finds Craig's power over Malkovich in¬
triguing and winds up rejecting her in favor of Craig. She tells Lotte
she'll be late for Malkovich and hangs up—a dangling cause that hooks
the sequence to the following one. An aftermath scene ensues, with
Lotte walking lonely New York streets in the rain.
Sequence F: Craig Gets His Woman
This nine-minute sequence is centered on Craig’s final conquest of Mal¬
kovich and, as a result, Maxine. It immediately picks up on tlie appoint¬
ment made previously: Maxine goes to meet Malkovich and the two
make love on the dining room table—with Craig now fully in control.
The movie switches to Lotte, who remains alone in the rain, this time
in a taxi. She turns up at Lester's house, and in the process initiates the
second major subplot—Lester's secret scheme to achieve immortality.
Because this subplot is begun so late in the picture, a considerable
amount of exposition occurs just before the end of the second act—also
quite unusual. Lotte confesses to Lester her obsession with Malkovich,
and mentions the Malkovich “museum" she'd discovered while visiting
him the last time. Lester solves the mystery of the portal, an issue that,
as noted previously, was deftly avoided in Sequence C. He explains that
he is none other than Captain Mertin, a character introduced in the
orientation video, who discovered the portal ninety years before and
used it to leap into the body of Lester, a much younger man, and thus
remain alive. By leaping from one such “vessel body" to another, he
can achieve immortality. He further explains that Malkovich is the next
“vessel body," and he must go through the portal into Malkovich by
midnight of Malkovich's 44^'" birthday. Tf he goes in too late, he'll be
absorbed: diverted into the next “infant" vessel, doomed forever to look
out of that person's eyes without being able to control anything. This
Clc« •l'. leap imo M.lk«vicVs bodp^ Th ^
ITl LS »d Tbieclvd-I-Pins into
of his 44‘^ and Craig (as Malkovich); Craig
demonstrates his P,f oicture Maxine is deeply im-
the dance f MaLvich forever, explaining that
S:;?haTe acts to h,s nioneykraig adds to this that he^an use Mai-
kovich’s ““'"6 the resolution
of Ins dreams, and faces the prospect ^ "bp,„t les-
sequence ends with one moie leapine to the Malkovich
the central tension of Act III
Sequence G: Craig With The World On A String
Oue ufth. aspect, of Beorg Jehu
feel is that the acto, plarins the ' ”“t f but the
of the last three sequences. The pro ago
actor playing him, lohn Cusac ' ^ As
of the mm-33 mmutes-Cusack is onsc and hair-
the third act begins, he exists in manner only, his manner
style evoked bnhe actor John Makovic^^
s 44 - birthday-rather than any dramatic tension. It
event—Malkovich s 44 M 3 |Vnvich and a performance
also features Theater While these amount to brilliant
by him at the over MaOcovich’s body, they
comic explorations of the n ^ inthis volume, and
lack the compelling use of a^iy There is only a hint
a result the sequence itseif has an armless quality'. There y
194
screenwriting
of conflict^ during cutaways to Lester> Lotte, and their friends, and these
cutaways lay the groundwork for the tension of the final sequence. But
in the three major scenes of the sequence—the meeting with Mah
kovich's agent, the mockumentary, and the performance at the ABT,
there is little conflict and therefore no compelling tension.
The sequence begins with Maxine and Craig (as Malkovich) meeting
with Malkovich's agent and announcing his plans to switch careers from
acting to puppeteering. A gap of eight months follows, announced by
an intertitle.
Craig (as Malkovich) is then shown arriving home in time to watch
a TV special on himself The mockumentary is a comic exploration of
the notion of puppetry as high art form, and also an economical means
of delivering exposition—letting the audience know what has transpired
since the previous scene. Among the important bits of information is
the fact that Malkovich's relationship with Maxine has grown strained;
this is reinforced by a cutaway to Maxine, gently caressing the lips of
Craig's “Lotte” puppet.
During the mockumentary, there are two cutaways to Lester's bouse,
where Lester, Lotte, and the elderly friends watch the same mockumen-
taiy on television. Lotte expresses disgust at the sight of Maxine with
Malkovich, but Lester assures her the “travesty” will be over by morn¬
ing—a dangling cause that creates at least some anticipation as the film
heads to the final sequence.
When the mockumentary is over, Craig (as Malkovich) telegraphs
the agenda for the evening: he is heading to the ABT for a Swan Lake
benefit, and afterward hopes to celebrate his 44^^ birthday with Maxine,
Since his 44'^ birthday has already been established as a deadline for
Lester to enter the portal, so Craig's statement helps to create a subtle
anticipation.
Craig's successful performance of Swan Lake brings the sequence to
a close.
Sequence H: ''Look away!”
The final sequence, which runs eleven and a half minutes, is unified by
dramatic tension: Craig's decision to leave Malkovich in order to get
Maxine back. It begins with Craig (as Malkovich) returning home with
a birthday cake clearly marked “44,” only to discover that Maxine has
been kidnapped. Lester calls him and threatens to kill Maxine if Craig
, ..n’t leave Malkovich immediately. Craig responds with what’s at
for him.' if he leaves Malkovich, he’ll lose his career, his yy'
L srer in turn responds by telling Craig that he and hts
fL old and will die if they don’t get into Malkovich by mid^
'Sht-nangUng cause that provides the main line of tenston during
^TSaJM^kovlch) hangs up the phone and Lester concedes defeat.
toS suggests they go into the portal and push Craig out; Lester tells h«
that Craig is too pLerful and would just jam them into Malkovich
,b™us-an important bit of exposition that sets up the next
Tn which Lotte angry and void of hope, tries to shoot Maxine.
" to escape; Lotte follows her and the mo
have a wild chase through Malkovich’s
both dumped in the pouring rain on the New ]ersey Turnpike. One
to, r«o”concL M«ine ,.v«!s
“rie switch., b..k,o C,.i 8 (a, Maikov,ch), who drirfe, alone
in a bi, pondering hi. dilemma. A, 1«, b. call, !«« and , 5 ,.., ,o
leave Miltovioh. C.aig wind, »p o.t ,h. New Jersey
a brief respite, Malkovich ts taken over by Lester and his friends, ,ust
before the midnight deadline, closing off that dangling cause.
0" Z tnmpik., Catsand lou. --“j;;
tiiluina love for Maxine, She again rejects mm, and the two women tak
off in a car leaving Craig to initiate one last dangling cause, e vows
fiack mio the pmtal and take over Malkovich again so Ma-e
love him once more. The exposition provided earlier-tha after mid
night anyone entering the Malkovich portal wiU be "absorbed adds
dramatic irony to Craigs stated intent. Char-
An intertitle announces the passage of seven years, after wMch Char
lie Sheen arrives at Malkovich’s new California homu Malkovich has
dearly been taken over by Lester, as evidenced by hts hairstyle and r d
both rfectiPB «.r-. Wo, Lcst.t <f “
into the house, where they greet Lestei s wi e or ^ pjjp,pntolovy'
prets Charlie’s greeting, the final payoff of the speech-impedinientol gy
'\ster brings Charlie upstairs and asks him howhe’d
forever, then show him a room containing a new s nn p
little girl. He introduces her as Emily-a dialogue hook mto the ne^
“ efwhich finds a seven-year-old girl, Emily, plapng
her two moms, Maxine and Lotte, After Maxine tickles her, E y
I ack aiid Jooks at her two moms admiringly, and Craig’s voice is heard
calling out forlornly to Maxine, and urging Emily to '‘look away”—J
rommand she ignores. The dangling cause of Craig’s intent to take over
Ikovich again is dosed off here: he is condemned forever to occupy
EmiJy s body but have no control over her.
Being John Maikovich: The Disappegrmg Lead Actor
197
BEING JOHN MALKOVTCH
Sequence Breakdown
Running
Seq. Descri-ption Length Time
ACT I
A Openbig titles and puppet sVio'vv; Craig tries to make 15:04 15:04
money on the street as a puppeteer but gets puncViedj (14%)
he ans^vers an ad in the paper and lands the job at Lester
Corp, then watches the orientation video. Unifying
Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Protagon ist. Craig. Objective:
To get a job.
Point of attack: Craig sees Maxine for fhefost time.
B Craig pursues Maxine while dealing with Lester's 20:06 35:10
lewdness. Craig is rejected by MaxLne at the Stuffed Pig, (33%)
later confesses his obsessive Love for her, is rejected
again, then discovers the portal. Aftenvard, Maxine
proposes the business relationship using the portal.
Craig accepts. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension,
Frotagenist Craig. Objective: Maxire.
Predicament. Craig will use the portal to pursue
Maxine.
ACT II
(Main tension; Will Craig succeed in landLn.g Maxine by using
the John Malkovich poital?)
C Craig pursues the business venture, but Lotte
unexpectedly gets hooked on fceiag Malkovich, and
starts to fall for Maxine as v\^ell. Lotte goes on a
with Maxine through Malkovich. Meanwhile j.M. Inc.
has its first successhA customer, Umfyi7ig Aspect
Dramatic Tension. Frotagmist Craig. Objective: To
pursue the relationship with Maxine, and the business
venture, without Lotte interfering,
D Maxine comes over for dinner; both Lotte and Craig go 8:15 59:14
after her. Maxine rejects Craig ontiight and will only (56%)
accept Lotte when she's inside jolin Malkovich. lotte
arranges another dste with Maxine through Malkovich;
the two make love, Craig gets jealous, contfonts Lotte,
then confronts Maxine, who accuses him of wrongly
choosing the unrequited kind of love. Unifying Aspect
Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Lotte. Objective: To
pursue her relationship with Maxine,
First Cicbnijiation: Craig alone in Led while his wife is
in John Malkovich [54:25^—51H).
E Craig kidnaps Lotte, then 'ms a successful date with
Maxine as Malkovich, in. wTich he realizes he can
control Malkovich, Malkovich responds by investigating
17:20 1:16:34
(72%)
15:49 50:59
(48%)
198
SCREENWRi TjNf.
J.M. Inc. and going on rhe “John Malkovich Ride^’
himself. Afterward, he threatens Craig with legal action.
Craig makes another date with Maxine, pretending to
be Lotte inside Malkovich. Lotte escapes with the help
of Elijah the chimp, reveals Craig’s deception to
Maxine. Maxine unexpectedly finds making love to
Craig through Malkovich intriguing, and rejects Lotte.
Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist:
Malkovich. Objective: To find out the truth about
Maxine.
F Craig and Maxine make love; afterward he does his
Dance of Despair. He and Maxine agree that he will
remain inside John Malkovich forever, and pursue
puppeteering, too- Meanwhile Lotte goes to Lester for
help; Lester reveals his true identity (Capt. Mertin), the
secret of the portal, and the human vessel. Unifying
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist. Craig. Objective:
To get Maxine through controEing Malkovich.
Second Culmination: Craig agrees to be John
Malkovich forever, so he can stay with Maxine.
ACT III
G Main tension has been resolved—Craig got the girl.
This sequence examines the comic implications of his
married life and his new career as a puppeteer, and
keeps alive the subplot of Captain Mertin and his plans
Craig watches a documentaiy about himself, then does
a performance at the ABT. Unifying Aspect Event.
(Malkovich’s 44'^' birthday],
H Craig returns home to find Maxine kidnapped, While 11:34 1:46:23
Craig broods at his loss of Maxine, Lotte chases Maxine (100%)
through iMalkovich’s subconscious before the two are
spilled out on the road and have a final confrontation,
in which Maxine reveals to Lotte that she’s carrying
Lotte’s baby. Craig finally abandons Malkovich out of
love for Maxine, only to find himself rejected again by
the side of the New Jersey Turnpike. He vows to return
to the portal to regain Maxine, and winds up stuck
inside Emily. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist Craig, Objective: Saving Maxine’s life.
Resolution: Craig loses Maxine but is condemned to
look at her through the eyes of Emily the rest of his
life.
9:04 1:34:49
( 91 %)
9:11 1:25:45
( 81 %)
T
The Fellowship of the Ring:
The Shotgun Approach
, bringins The Mo»'sf»P , ,aq.e "insttUed base" of
ced two difficult prob ems a ^ jhe Lord of the Rings
evoted fans who had tea b ^ against any major changes in
nd thus had expectations that m 8 = complicated nar-
.e narrative for adaptation puiTOS«, and a . ,^ .ompUcated
“bfe".iTork .nb .™s, be stood fuocion both as s se -
:ontained work and a ^ success, it is apparent that the
With both critical and box-o obstacles. Wt upon
filmmakers succeeded in overcomi g . many
closer scrutiny from a might have further
storyteUing choices not made by comparison with the
enhanced the impact of the wor . ^
book from which it was adapted.
tfie choices the filmrnakers
the varying impact of these ^ screenwriter wdll encounter pro-
The fact is that most for hire or from doing
fessionally—for exanip e, m reviewing his or her
script consultation or stoiy ? niasterpteces. It is by analyzing
ovvnworkorthatoffriends--is41« be - ip^ ^
,perfect work m an -tormed and .
— 199 —
SXov'"' ‘” *«-»p4 XXXX'»
Jc.XXXtXz''’' X"“' “ "■' i»«.”,
not a drama and thus not constrained by Ibl leed f u
form. It also seems due to the frasrmpnf dramatic
portraying about one-thtrd of the ToLen ZV^T
rial m its entirety. The main tt^nc' ^ niate-
invoJvement with the rint^ certainly revolves around Frodo^s
the rest of the movie involves Frodo’s L
departure for Free functions as the end of”th
least, the end of the beginning. very
It is at best an uncertain predicamenf f
ture of Frodo's purney, the Tense of its d ^ f “ cursoiy; the na-
pctive-these are not Te^y clear
readily apparent at aU. Tlmeipumm ‘''''™y^‘'.on-is not
the usual place where the second cul ' f ^ P’cture^
and the Fellowship eZertTs7n Zl?Z^^^^^
While this marks the end of seane Mines of Moria.
the purney m the way tt eXf T’ o'-
another way station on hat Turl T does. It^ust
a major character. -^^de more difficult by the loss of
fT"' "V•»'
mg the Fellowship, jhe b,„fe ,g “* “"'‘V
the font of third-act tension hut if\ . considered
quence, aibeit a long one ftwentv tension of a single se^
another obstacle ^ t serves as just
duction of some truly new Issue ''
plenty of dangling causes left to hook uTwfth ffi open-ended, with
the saga. second installment of
VVhila the main tension and therefore act breaks may not be clear,
the him does rely on sequences—thirteen in all—to help convey the au-
^lience’s attention forward. Both the original Tolkien work and the
^ovie are episodic.
One aspect of The Tellowship of the Ring that distinguishes it from
ail the other films studied in this volume is the relative weakness of its
protagonist. As Is detailed below, in the first hvo sequences he is all but
absent from the screen, and subsequently he seems lost in the shuffle
of the many characters that accompany him. Notably, of the thirteen
sequences in the film, he is the protagonist in only three.
These divergences from the typical form of feature films are not in¬
dicative of a daw; ultimately, what matters is whether the picture suc¬
cessfully engages audiences and leaves them feeling satisfied. While
there may have been ways to create a more thorough sense of 'Tom-
pietenessf on the whole, the film succeeds in these tasks. The purpose
of this analysis is to weigh whether or not alternative choices might has^e
been even more effective.
Overall, probably the chief, persistent problem with how the script
was executed is its failure to set up situations and characters in a way
that moves the audience from observer to participant. The effect is a
film that plays more like a travelogue—^the audience conveyed from
place to place making discoveries along the way—than a dramatically
unfolding epic, with the audience engaged in the emotionahy charged
issues of hope and fear along the course of the journey (a comparison
with Lawrence of Arabia is particularly useful in this regard). This is not
to say that the picture does not provoke hope and fear at all; rather, that
many opportunities to enhance these emotions are missed. The result is
that, emotionally, the picture functions only on a very basic level: the
audience hopes the characters donh come to physical harm and is afraid
they might.
Furthermore, the setups that do occur tend to telegraph information
in a w^ay that undermines any chance.for surprise, one of the staples of
cinematic stoiyTelling since its inception. The result is a three-hour ac¬
tion movie with few surprise twists. One may argue that the familiarity
of Tolkien hooks to so many mitigates against this—m> one is left to be
surprised—but the surprise twist or reversal does more than delight an
audience; it offers glimpses of possible outcomes and as such lends a
sense of spontaneity and liveliness to the story.
‘ b"* voice,’ >>' 01 ! wi,|,
has changed. The disembodied voire J k audience the world
fcl hook_.hc ctaic p„“e".erSh ™'‘“' P™"“' » wi
c=*l p«u,„--„hic|, d,„, , 1 ,, oud”nc“Z,XT?
These initial words f/^ii j -l ^^utsct.
^cnbrng .he f„,gi„g of IcJr’r”;";™'' r"”'” *-
S.vcn to ,hc „„s of dv«, dw„„f’id ”5 ' we„
created in secret by the “Dark Lord ” was
power „„ oil ,he oAerc. Sa.,„„ piocc r/ioi t'
before be,„g confronted bp an armv of dve toi “ ''•™“ '»*
Sauron appears, wearing the ring and dn a great battle,
one man, Isildur, cuts off Sauron’s tW finL““f
dark lord to implode. The narntm- ttf ^ ^ ^ sword, causing the
the ring—it corrupts Jsildur, winds up^at'^tTT
It IS found by a creature named Goiium h
hundred years before it gets awav fr!
named Bilbo. The narration ends^ith^ dT
soon come when hobbits will shaoe the f
The decision to place om u n
minutes of tire him is a problematic r «P“ing seven
so much information, k^d out withn
cult for an audience to grasp context, is diffi-
comparing this voice-over introduction ""
m the opening minutes of Double Indenmitv
logue lasts under three minutes aZ { (Chapter 4). Neffs mono^
text; Neff is arguing with Keyes outT^'' '' tindergirded by a sub-
openmg voice-over in Fellowship of the
audience is simply getting mformatL xf ^ completely neutral; the
audience curious about the ring ° ‘s made to make the
W (Chapro, 7) I, „o„hwhifc in th a ZST f"™' ”ta™-
Tord appear in quick succession, without any
Fellowship of the Ring: The Shotgun Anproach
203
or context created for them. One of the most powerful tools of
stoiytelling—^the scene or preparation—is left unexploited. The casual
introduction of Sauron is in particular a lost opportunity; one need only
compete his introduction to that of the halrog near the middle of the
him. For the latter demon, the stoi'}Uellers showed skillful use of indirec¬
tion and retardation: for live minutes the viewer is tantalized with hints
of the monster—sounds^ roars, the trembling ground, the fiery light—
before actually seeing it. When it finally arrives, its visual impact is con¬
siderable, and it is easily the most spectacular character introduction in
the film.
Since Sauron is a villain who manipulates so much of the action
across nine hours of film, a comparison of his introduction is useful to
the introduction of a magical figure in a very different kind of fantasy
film —The Wizard of Oz. In that 1939 classic, the Wizard is mentioned
in dialogue and discussed for an hour before he actually appears ons-
creen> and when at last he does, accompanied by fire, smoke, and con¬
siderable noise, the impact is, again, considerable.
A more mundane prohle.m with the dramatization of Sauron s fall is
that it lays hare a weakness in the backstory—the Dark Lord, empow¬
ered with the mighty One Ring, can be beaten simply by having his ring
finger cut off (in the Tolkem v\mrk, Isildur cuts off the finger after
Sauron has been killed).
Perhaps the biggest problem posed by the choice of starting the pic-
tare with the long history lesson is that it eliminates any chance for the
exploitation of mystery in the opening sequence. By using this “shot¬
gun.” approach to giving the audience information, the viewer winds up
ahead of the characters for a good portion of the first act. In this, it's
worth considering North by North^w^t (Chapter 6), in which Hitchcock
and Lehman exploit mystery^ throughout the lirst forty minutes of the
film. One need only imagine what the impact would have been if these
storytellers had spent the first seven minutes of that film using a voice¬
over narration to describe in great detail the workings of Vandamm's
spy operation, the role that Eve plays in it, and the CIA^s use of a non¬
existent agent to fool Yandanim, before introducing Roger in the mid¬
dle of his busy day. Some of the most memorable scenes in cinema his¬
tory would have been ruined.
Ultimately, the first seven minutes of The Fellowship of the Ring is
emblematic of the storytelling s Ale of the movie as a whole; the audi¬
ence is an observer rather than a participant, ■witnessing a series ol un¬
folding events without any sense of anticipation, hope or fear, And in
204
SCREENWRITIWG
adapting a work of epic size» every minute of screen time is precious, so
using them up in this way means that there is less screen time available
for other, critical storytelling tasks.
Sequence A: The Long-Expected Party
The first sequence, which runs from the end of the voice-over narration
to the departure of Gandalf from the Shire, runs nineteen and a half
minutes. There is no dramatic tension to unify the sequence, which is
defined more by an event—Bilbo’s party—and his subsequent depar¬
ture. Central to the action is the reintroduction of the One Ring.
The sequence begins with Frodo sitting by a tree reading, then run¬
ning happily to greet the wizard Gandalf, who has arrived on a one-
horse wagon. Frodo asks him for news of the outside world; Gandalf
engages in conversation that is for the most part inaudible to the audi¬
ence. The two pass by some hobbits setting up a tent and a banner that
reads "Happy Birthday Bilbo Baggins.” Gandalf asks about Bilbo, re¬
marking that he understands the party will be of “special magnih-
cence”—the second dangling cause of the picture. Frodo tells Gandalf
he suspects Bilbo is up to something—another dangling cause, and the
two make an oblique reference to Bilbo’s previous adventures with Gan¬
dalf. After this, Frodo bids Gandalf good-bye and jumps off the wagon.
Shortly after this, Gandalf arrives at Bilbo’s home.
The use of a ride through Bag End to introduce the setting of the
story is a good one, but the three-minute scene suffers from two prob¬
lems: one, there is no conflict and therefore no tension or anticipation
created wdthin it, and two, it is not rich enough in the information to
justify its length. Essentially we discover that Hobbits are quiet folk, that
Bilbo—a character who hasn’t yet been introduced—is planning a party
and perhaps something more, and that he had some adventure.
Bilbo welcomes Gandalf into his home and in the course of their
conversation we learn that Bilbo plans to leave the Shire to finish his
book, that he feels old, and that he does not plans to return. The scene
runs over three minutes and suffers from the same problem as the pre¬
vious one: it has no conflict in it, and thus no dramatic tension. It pro¬
vides some exposition about Bilbo and telegraphs Bilbo’s intentions
after the party, but Bilbo is a relatively minor character in the picture,
and any time spent on him is time not spent on introducing the audi-
T he Fellowship of the Rin^: The Shotgun --2^
ence to Frodo, who is the protagonist, and who remains something of a
rinher even as the film unfolds. ,
^The party that follows features the introduction of Sam, Merry,
Pippin the fetter two in the midst of a prank to steal and sy off one of
fo^fireworks. The flight of this “dragon” firework is a brief example o
Separation by contrast-the apparently menacing dewce proves, after
! few frightening moments, to be harmless, The dramatic highpoint of
the party is Bilbo’s disappearance into thin air afer saying hi.s las g
by?He then retreats-while invisible-to his home, w^ne he puts a
ralden ring back into his pocket (the device he evidently used to py-
0 m his disappearing act) and finds Gandalf already there waiting for
him There follows what amounts to the first dramatic syno m the p c-
tre^Gandalf trying to persuade a curiously resistant Bilbo to leave the
magic ring behind When at last Bilbo departs, leavdng the rmg, he utters
Tmediction: he wUl live happily ever after to the end of his: days.
bth Bilbo gone, the “thitd act” of the sec^uence beyns, and h s
deals exclusively with the ring: Gandalf s attempt to make sense of ft
.nd his handing it over to Frodo for safekeeping. The sequence en^
ivith hvo powefful dangling causes: Gandalfs announcement that he
must see to some “things,” and his warning to Frodo to keep the ring
secret and safe. Because of the opening narration, the syne is suffiised
bth dramatic irony-the characters are ignorant of the hrstoiy and na¬
ture of the ring, but the audience is quite aware.
Sequence B: The Truth About the Ring
The second sequence runs just under ten minutes and isyentered on
Gandalfs quest to determine the truth about Bilbo s ring.
a cutaway to an undisclosed location that appears to be a dark menac^
mv castle^ An anguished voice cries out, barely intelligibly, Shire, and
■l3a<rgms!” As soon as these words are uttered a volcano erupts and
several black-dad horsemen emerge at a gallop from some gates,
This episode runs under a minute m length and is visu^y g
but has no discernible storytelling function. Gtven given the kn^h o
the work and the need for economy, it is an example of a segment that
can be cut without affecting the story'. True enough, it can Iyer be m
BaradDfft in the fend of Mordoi, and the voice is that of Gollum, a
foe horsemen are the Black Riders, but none of this information is made
clear during the scene and all of it gets thoiongh treatment ’
foer' the segment’s presence here eliminates an opportunity to build up
206
screenwriting
The Fellowship of the R/ng: The Shotgun Approach
207
audience expectation—preparation. This is, aftec all, the home of the
Dark Lord himself, the seat of evil and the headquarters of an army of
horrible ores that threaten the whole of Middle Earth. Anticipation
could have been milked considerably, even across the sequels. Inserting
the image unannounced and unexplained can only diminish its impact
later.
Gandalf is next seen arriving at a distant city of undisclosed name,
where he researches the ring in a dusty library. Here, while he reads,
some of the scenes from the opening narration are repeated, and the
presence of a telltale engraving on the ring is revealed.
A cutaway follows, to a black-dad horseman terrifying a hobbit and
inquiring as to Baggins; he is directed to Hobbiton. This sets up a scene
of preparation by contrast, in which Frodo arrives home to a dark,
empty house where the window is open and papers are blowing about,
lending the place a sense of lurking danger. A hand reaches out of the
shadows to touch him; it proves to be that of Gandalf, who pays off an
earlier Line and closes off a dangling cause from the end of the first se¬
quence: 'Ts it secret? Is it safe?”
Gandalf and Frodo soon confirm it is, indeed, the One Ring. Gandalf
briefly recounts for Frodo the history of the ring—the third time the
audience has heard it—and then delivers exposition about the reawak¬
ening of the Dark Lord in Mordor and his desire to reclaim the ring and
by its power bring on a ‘'second darkness.” He tells Frodo that Sauron
must never find the ring, a dangling cause that informs the rest of the
picture.
Gandalf concludes their only option is for Frodo to convey the ring
out of the Shire. As Frodo packs his things, Gandalf telegraphs the plan:
Frodo needs to travel across country, during the day only, and meet
Gandalf in Bree, at the Inn of the Prancing Pony. He must also not
reveal that his name is Baggins. Meanwhile Gandalf will go to the head
of his order to try to get some answers.
Before Frodo leaves, they discover that Sam has been eavesdropping
on their conversation. The sequence ends with a dialogue hook uttered
in response to Sam's plea for mercy—Gandalf tells him, ‘T've thought
of a better use for you.”
Frodo is thus suddenly thrust into the heart of the story from the
periphery. Unlike other films studied in this volume, in which the flow
of life of the protagonist is carefully established prior to the point of
attack, which interrupts that flow, in The Fellowship of the Ring so little
time in the opening two sequences is spent with the protagonist that
there is no apparent flow of life from which he is snatched. This can
create the unfortunate impression that Frodo exists only because foe
film needs him. A stronger choice might be to make sure foe opening
sequences are built around him, so that his inner and outer conflicts
can work together to create a more powerful effect.
Sequence C: The Journey To Bree
This thirteen-minute sequence opens with Frodo already starting out
on his journey and Gandalf urging Sam to keep up. Gandalf completes
the setup for the journey begun m foe previous sequence by tellmg the
two to be careful—the enemy has many spies, and the ring must be kept
safe—it wants to be found.
Some information is missing from the setup, though—how long will
it take? Hoav many days of travel? Has Frodo ever been to Bree? Or even
outside foe Shire? (We learn later that Sam hasn't.) What do they think
about this journey? Geography—maps—are very important in the Tolk-
ein books, but foe film is curiously Lacking in a sense of geography—of
distances, directions, and the spatial relationship between various lands.
In contrast, the other epic analyzed in this yolume—Lawrence of Ara-
dedicates considerable screen time in carefully setting up dis¬
tances, dangers, and expectations,
After journeying for a while and then setting up camp, one of the
Black Riders appears menacingly in the foreground of a twilight expanse
of landscape— picking up the dangling cause of Gandalfs warnings
about Sauronh spies.
Following this is a cutaway to Gandalf riding to visit Saruman, as
telegraphed in the previous sequence, The two have a friendly greeting,
and Saruman delivers exposition: Sauron is gathering an army great
enough to launch an assault on Middle Earth. He also tells Gandalf that
Sauronh forces are moving and foe Black Riders have already left in
search of foe ring, a dangling cause that informs the remamder of the
sequence. At this point Gandalf tries to run, apparently to warn Frodo,
but Saruman stops him and reveals himself to be a servant of
Mordor—a traitor. Gandalf refuses to join him; the two battle it out
with Saruman getting the better of it.
As to this hve-minute segment with Saruman, two storyteliing issues
can he raised- One—another chance for preparation seems to have been
missed. As noted previously, the film is largely void of surprise msts.
Gandalf, going in desperation to a trusted mentor, only to find out he's
a traitor, is an ideal opportunity to use this storytelling technique. In-
208
screenwriting
stead, because of the way the segment is written and shot, it is clear very
early on—and long before Gandalf seems to realize it—that Saruman is
crooked-
Two—is the segment necessary at all? True enough, it allows the
filmmakers to display prodigious skill with special effects, but a price is
paid in the storytelling. By showing Gandalf waylaid, the audience is
aware immediately that Frodo and his companions will not be seeing
him at the Prancing Pony as arranged. Another chance for preparation
by contrast—and a surprise twist—is thus lost (in the Tolkein work,
his fate is concealed in this way, preserving the surprise twist). Another
advantage of cutting the segment is that it saves five precious minutes
that could be used elsewhere. In particular, the hobbits' memorable en¬
counter -with Tom Bombadil is not in the film.
The audience's foreknowledge of Gandalf’s travails does have the ef¬
fect of adding dramatic irony to the scenes with the hobbits: they are
unaware that Gandalf will not be meeting them at Bree. Unfortunately,
those scenes are not exploited for dramatic irony. No mention is made
in them of Gandalf at all, nor of their hope/expectation that they will
soon be with him and heTl protect them.
After Gandalf is shown indisposed with Saruman, the film switches
back to the Shire, where Frodo and Sam encounter Merry and Pippin,
two mischief-makers introduced during the fireworks display. The four
wind up on a wooded road, where they have their first encounter with
a Black Rider. A chase through the foggy, moonlit woods leads to a nar¬
row escape at the Buckleberry Feriy, en route to Bree.
Sequence D: Bree
The fourth sequence opens with the hobbits' arrival at Bree—closing off
the dangling cause initiated at the end of Sequence B—and is unified by
location (the town) and to a lesser extent dramatic tension (Strider s
desire to protect the hobbits from the Black Riders),
Frodo and his companions make their way to the Prancing Pony,
where they discover what the audience already knows: Gandalf is not
there. Very quickly, two dangling causes are picked up—Pippin reveals
to some bar patrons that Frodo’s name is Baggins, and Frodo trips and
falls, and winds up with the ring on his finger—both violations of Gan-
dalf's admonitions from vSequences B and C.
Befo„ F„do »» Cte
are alerted to his presence, tri eij^^ ^preparation by contrast,
becomes visible again, and m pnemv he first appeared
p.„.„ ,0 b. a g,... ally anl
lo b,. Stride, ottb ,heacenea«l. " anote effective
r
tictitirts before tffeyrea^^^^^^ , . ,bo,,
Strider and the hobbits are
r”“hTC“ teC! le" (atiowr, in .be
plains what they are. the S sequence
SwiratSa’^Ze: "They wti, neve, stop bontinnea."
Sequence E: The Journey To Rivendell
fin ft s Strider leadine the hobbits across an open field.
The next scene finds S^^i^er leaQ g Ri,,endell, the house
Thus begrosthe W-rrrmule 6 seq gi„„siona
:Xti::raC./a4erseg»«^
pUees,» see “”<1,o hope tor aud
“We have no choice hut o truth mm y
unclear. Any other possible choices of limitless pos-
tiooed or explored, deprooug rhe Sim of.
sihility. It leaves the impression that they need
the story requires them to. sequence is also in
210
SCREENWRfTING
such questions as why they should trust Strider, and where he plans to
take them, before they set out on the journey (as in the book)> not after
they’ve already traveled what seems a fair distance. A fully developed
dramatic scene might have delivered a more forceful setup and paid big
dividends later.
After Strider tells them they’re going to Rivendell and that they must
not stop till nightfall, the film crosscuts to Saruman> who is busy getting
in touch with Sauron through use of a palantir. Sauron instructs Saru-
man to build him an army “worthy of Mordor'—a dangling cause that
is picked up and developed during several subsequent scenes. At this
point, some deformed-looking but polite creatures (later identified as
ores) enter into Saruman^s presence and ask him about the command
from “the eye’b Saruman replies “We have work to do’^—a dialogue
hook into the following scene, which shows trees being torn down. We
next see a beat-updooking Gandalf awakening at the top of Saruman^s
tower, who looks over the edge and sees the evil work being done.
This second cutaw^ay to the Gandalf/Saruman subplot lasts just under
two minutes, and from a storytelling viewpoint it seems as unnecessary
as the first such cutaway. The segment is essentially expositoiy: Saru¬
man is given orders to build an army. In response, he inexplicably starts
tearing down trees. Meanwhile, Gandalf is still alive but apparently im¬
prisoned. The use of these two minutes of screen time in the setup of
the sequence might easily have paid much bigger dividends dramatically
than their use here.
The film now switches back to the journey of Strider and the hobbits,
who have come upon Weathertop, an abandoned watchtower, and will
spend the night. Strider hands out some swords and tells the hobbits to
keep them close, as he is going to have a look around.
Frodo is next shown awakening from sleep; he becomes instantly
alarmed upon seeing that the others have started a campfire. He puts it
out, but it is too late—five Nazgul are seen approaching from the base
of the watchtower. It is a moment again without setup—no warning has
been given not to start a fire, and the fact that if s a mistake is revealed
to the audience at the same time that it’s put out by Frodo—too late for
the audience to participate in the sense of danger^ except by inferring
danger from ProdoT reaction.
The four hobbits are no match for the Nazgul, and in desperation
Frodo puts on the ring. His disappearance only temporarily thwarts
them; Frodo winds up getting stabbed. At this moment Strider shows
up with a sword in one hand and a torch in the other and quickly dis-
The Fellowship of the Ring.'lhe Sho^u nAPH^
211
u scene is wonderftaUy shot but the stoiytellmg
an Jit’r, '.“ read,ly daUd b, the »» of 6,e, why
?r-,% Jet' ™ them with totches tatha. than swords! Tlt.s is not an
rr^atLjVinnbntnednp^iy^^^
,0 h.iid a fire, thus prooidihg the setnp so crnc.al to the battle
Strides disables the Nastgui.he goes
the unhappy news that the hobbrt y,e,L The
U1 4. ..rnirh ic; Ytrv seilous aud needs elvisti meaicme lu
and the ores are hard at work creating weapons and aigg g P
end the hobb.ts, deep in the
for chase scene'that occupies the remainder ^
212
1
SCREENWRITIN Ci
the Buckleberry Ferry), then turns to Frodo, who seems to be fading
fast. Arwen's desperate reaction signals effective use of preparation by
contrast: her moments of despair occur just before Frodo is successfully
revived.
Sequence F: Rivendell and the Creation of the Fellowship
The hffh sequence is the longest in the film and is unified by place—the
elven city of Rivendell. It has at its heart a pivotal event, the council of
Elrond, at which a decision is made about the ring and the Fellowship
is formed—two events that will shape the action of the rest of the pic¬
ture. While the sequence has a few dramatic scenes, it suffers from lack
of focus; in particular, a failure to adequately set up the momentous
nature of the council of Elrond and the decision that issues from it
The establishment of the Fellowship does amount to something of a first
culmination. It occurs just over the halfway point in the film, and it
provides a mirror opposite of tlie end, when the Fellowship is dissolved.
The sequence begins with Frodo returning to consciousness and
being reunited with Gandalf and the other hobbits. He also sees Bilbo,
who has completed his book—closing off a dangling cause from the first
sequence. While Frodo looks at BilboT book, he sees a map of the Shire
and mentions his yearning to go back to it. He tells Bilbo that he spent
his youth pretending he was elsewhere, on adventures with Bilbo, but
that his own adventure did not turn out the way he expected.
The placement of this exposition here is problematic; as suggested
elsewhere, this sort of information about Frodo would be useful for the
audience to know in the opening sequence of the picture, since it would
help put FrodoT acceptance of the task Gandalf asks of him—to carry
the ring to Bree—in a very different light: the hobbit who’d long imag¬
ined himself an adventurer gets at last an opportunity to become one.
It would also cast in a very different light FrodoT desire to return to
the Shire, expressed both to Bilbo and to Sam in the following scene.
Instead of being mere exposition, the scenes would be rendered deeper
and more resonant, because they would mark a turning point in the
evolution of the main character—from a self-imagined adventurer to
one who realizes such a life is not for him. His predicament would then
grow more poignant when he soon realizes that he must continue on
anyway—a reluctant hero. Because this information is introduced so
late in the film, it has little impact.
.fte, Frodo .h./ve -»»= ttSVee™
to and iat«a t™. to d.d «!.« they ae.
,o to.e a ” home. He loot, at the ting end condnte
out to do, and it s tune ro go
^oud thet i, scene, bn. agah, the
lowing scene, and in storytelling rea-
whole discussion occurs very 5^^
sons. logLcally. i. Jre.ches ^ ^Wen an, though,
would haye tmveled so “a"', ,he, would do
to what they were going to o i Issues would more
after they got there. As P"-
logically be addressed aydyttled is
to the departure from Bre . ^
TeTettrotit enhance the emotional impact of the
journey from Bree. to return to the Shire,
After Ftodo and Sam share ^ ah nm t developed
,ke Mna “tccurs: Gandalf attempting to eonvinc.
dramatic scene of the seq Rlvendeh- It also fanctrons
tp'Z:. .mmedialel, the
Frodo's expressed intent to "Almv of ores
Gandalf tells Elrond that doting .he d„-
with goblins, which Will be ab ceen in the earlier cutaways
"C»isrEts;e:iodes..^
ltu;“;tXV.y unite behind Sddet, who is here te-
vealedto be more ^ jovalcy would have been more
The revelationr that Slrider ^ to Elrond's mentioning it.
effective if more thoroughly se up. leaderless and
214
SCREENWRIXu^q
lack of leadership on the peoples of Middle Earth. Once so dramatized
this revelation—that the outwardly humble Strider is none other than
the person who can step for^vard and become the king for which the
people are yearning—could play as a significant punctuation mark
rather than mere exposition sandwiched between other such exposition
During the scene between Gandalf and Eirond> three unannounced
and unexplained cutaways occur showing new characters—a bearded
man arrives alone on horseback, a white-haired elf likewise appears with
some companions, and a dwarf approaches on foot. These are later re¬
vealed to be Boromir, Legolas, and Gimli, three major characters who
will soon be members of the Eellowship of the Ring after which the film
and book are named. The muted introduction of these three is worth
contrasting to the memorable way in which Merry and Pippin are intro¬
duced, not to mention Sherif Ali, Auda Abu Tayi, and Lawrence in Law¬
rence of Arabia.
Following Gandalf and Elrond's discussion is a scene in which Strider
reads quietly and has an oblique interaction with Boromir—^the man
seen entering on horseback—who picks up a shattered swords drops it,
and exits. Again, with screen time very precious, it seems odd to expend
it on a scene that seems to lack any dramatic or story content.
At this point, the elf Arwen enters, and a very effective dramatic
scene transpires in which she guesses he is reluctant to take the mantle
of leadership out of fear that he would succumb to the temptation to
which Isildur succumbed. She tenderly assures him he will succeed
where Isildur failed. This is a powerful dangling cause that will be revis¬
ited several times during the rest of the film. The scene ends with Arwen
giving Stride! a gift of jewelry, and confessing her love for him.
The film now switches to a meeting attended by Gandalf, Frodo, and
Strider (henceforth Aragorn, heir to the throne of Gondor), in addition
to Boromir, Legolas, Gimli, and some other unnamed serious-looking
white-bearded fellows, presided over by Elrond. The latter recounts the
danger they ah face, and tells them there is only one choice—the ring
must be destroyed, by tossing it into the fires of Mount Doom, in
Mordor. Boromir raises objections—Mordor is a remarkably difficult
place to journey into, containing much evil, many obstacles, poisonous
air, and unfriendly ores—important exposition delivered as ammuni¬
tion. The meeting soon dissolves into a shouting match until Erodo
steps forward and offers to take the ring to Mordor. The others quickly
agree to accompany him. Elrond accepts the arrangement and an¬
nounces the Fellowship of the Ring.
a. council also wigbs tho poa.bilit? J choice
b„iil i„ Ihe Barrow Downs, or “J^hen „,h„ poss.b.l-
ofhaving to "'™^Z°s”rfac,.ou has the additional advantage
ities are eliminated. This , Sauron might not
of being so outrageous and , S because none of
suspect what tire, were plannmg “ ^ a,ond announce,
these othe, pos.ihd.ttes... “Z ,“rentir. conned scene
„ the outset the onlp ctac. .™1 „isl„ed; it is only . maitet
borders on unnecess.T T d possibilities set before
of everyone acceding to evaporates and the dsnrget
ItontZSTpiace: the reason the Feiiorvship ntust do .ts de«l
is because that’s what the story letiuires.
Sequence G: To the Pass of Caradhras
This sequence is the second shortest ni the ^kk'deiire to lead the
,ninutes. It Is unified by dramatic Fellowship
Fellowship through the Pass o ara ^Trough various land-
™ >r’"
sequences (C ind E)^no toSrXng might
rhe, going!«™ obstacles will they Idsdy *
give us a sense an itinerary! they must hold
minute into the sequence, GandaLt p
tot,h on their course to, futti days and tti- to get “ « f ,, ^
and bora there go east to Moldot, Tins ,s critical intorma,
deliveiedin voice-over only and IS thus easy to miss^
oZrsVrcZn,zri.";£y^
”::rZ SZ .ef;ses-,.th.u, offe„„g any eapl.-
Afe, this, the ZdZeZ^^^ 'A
of Saruman -and opts to ■ the
southern route is he mg watched, and t y
216
SCREENWRIT INq
Pass of Caradhras, a snowy outcropping visible in the distance—thus
completing the ‘‘first act” of the setup—^the objective is now clear.
There follows another cutaway to Saruman, who is apparently mak¬
ing considerable progress building his orc/goblin army. We follow the
flight of the black birds through the underground chambers to Sarm
man, to whom they report. Saruman wonders aloud what Gandalf will
do if the mountain defeats him—will he risk a more dangerous road?
This dangling cause is picked up a short time later, after Saruman uses
magic to cause an avalanche, blocking the Fellowship's route through
the mountain pass.
A hurried snowbound conference Is held—Boromir urges them to
take the road through Rohan, and Gimli repeats his suggestion that they
go through the Mines of Moria. With the mention again of the mines,
Saruman’s voice is heard over Gandalf's image, explaining why Gandalf
dreads to go there—^the dwarves, apparently digging too deep, awak¬
ened some dreadful creature (“flame and shadow”). Saruman is then
seen looking at an illustration of the creature, later identified as a balrog.
Fortunately, this image is brief enough so as not to undermine the
highly effective entrance of this character later.
With the Fellowship at an impasse, Gandalf turns to Frodo and says
“Let the ring bearer decide.” Frodo quickly renders his decision: the
mines. This is, again, a curious way to handle exposition. As was the
case in Sequence H, having a discussion about the best route to Mordor
so late in the journey seems illogical; why wasn't it discussed at the out-
set? And why rely on Saruman’s voice-over to describe Gandalf's trepi¬
dation about the Mines of Moria? Wouldn’t he share his fears with the
others so they could weigh their decision? (Note: in the book, he does.)
And in the end, on what basis does Frodo decide? He doesn't seem to
have any information. The impression is the same as that after the
Council of Elrond: he makes this decision because the story needs him
to. This moment is worth comparing with Lawrence’s decision in Law¬
rence of Arabia to go back to rescue Gasim after the journey through the
Nefud desert. The pros, cons, stakes, hopes, and fears are emphatically
laid out for the audience and the characters before Lawrence decides to
go. His apparently risky, foolhardy decision becomes a chance for in¬
sight into his character. In contrast, the basis of Frodo's decision, and
its meaning for the quest, is a mystery.
Sequence H; The Mines of Moria
The journey of the Fellowship in the mines lasts almost twenty-eight
minutes of screen time, at that unity of place and action might be ap-
HT r.r ttipfrst eighteen minutes concern
propt»te fot one baitline the titeS’
Ihemttlves ptimitJy »tth the Fe p
nine ate c.tuet.d on the nndetat.ndtng
f1 * ---
a—. tt. -
go to the mmes Js to Mor^a, the Fellowship enters,
some delay m opening hospitaUty dwarf-style. Very quickly>
with Gimli promising them P V ^3odles. LegoLas
though, they and the of goblins. Boro-
pulls an arrow from one an ^ and proceed by way
utir has apparently won his arg^ stirs and
an opportunity for ^ drsor^^ and ambiguous, whh Gan-
trast-but the setup the opposite, and neither
dalf anticipating doom and Gim ’lj^^^._^CertainlT Gimli's expecta-
xeally sharing his expectation
tion is proven tvrong quickly, the characters ex-
think happened? There is n ^ Genii’s cousins and what
change any ideas wty ha are probably aU
this might mean ^ after the FeUowship as weU
S i:l"tropportuiiity for a rempind.hon scene (see text box o.
The Lysttrf of Gimlf s
tomh of his cousin Balm Was he really expecting to
-VF ih™*h .... .nl -1
-tlio.«vcoFtt»ttt„^^
film-missnigor minimal tyP ^,her side, and expresses
explains they have a four- ay 3 j^ather than having this
a hope that their P«f scene, which mtght also be
218
SCRE£!^WRlT lf^ft
relatives^ it is delivered again in voice-over while the characters are
marching. As such it is easily missed. And it is never explained just who
it is they’re hoping will not notice them.
After journeying a while, Gandalf stops and weighs which direction
to take them. This would be another opportunity for a recapitulation
scene, reviemng the issues noted above, but instead it is occupied by a
pep talk that Gandalf delivers to Frodo, and a brief discussion of the
creature Goilum, who is following them. Gandalf initiates here a dan¬
gling cause that will dangle beyond the end of the film—he feels that
Goilum will as yet play some important role in the drama.
The journey soon resumes, and Gandalf leads them to the great un¬
derground dwarf city where Girnh finds the tomb of his cousin Balin
and is devastated at the confirmation of his death. Gandalf reads from
a journal describing a hopeless battle. After he’s through reading, Pippin
accidentally creates a disturbance, threatening to pick up the dangling
cause initiated earlier by Gandalf—that they will be able to pass through
unnoticed.
Preparation by contrast is used effectively after the noises fall silent—
there is general relief among the nine that their whereabouts remain a
secret. Too soon, though, they begin to hear noises from below, signal¬
ing danger, Sam notices that Frodo's sword is glowing blue, indicating
trolls—the first payoff of this visual motif planted when Bilbo had given
him the sword at Rivendell. The Fellowship proceeds to do battle with
the ores and their cave troll, managing to defeat them all, but not before
Frodo is apparently run through with a lance.
Frodo emerges unharmed, though, due to the special chain mail he
wears—another payoff of Bilbo’s gifts to him. More ores are heard com¬
ing, though, and Gandalf cries out: '"To the Bridge of Kazad-duml”—a
dialogue hook into the next sequence.
Sequence I: The Balrog
The nine and a half minutes of Sequence I are probably the most effec¬
tive in the film, from a storytelling viewpoint. The setup is adequate^—
the “protagonist'' in the sequence is Gandalf and his objective is to lead
the other eight members of the Fellowship over the Bridge of Kazad-
dum. The obstacle is primarily the balrog, secondarily the ores and the
treacherous stone steps. The sequence also features masterful use of
preparation, in this case the retardation variety: as mentioned pre-
springing up from ^^low and outoum-
,vay. Too soon, the ores hav ^ j^cament sinks
tered. and all appears lost. As drehope^^^^^^ ,«ompamed by a hint of
in, though, there arises a , Q.^shddenly scatter, and momentary
StumstrSLTas Gandalf identifies the new mtruder as a balrog,
toth ««. rich „1A The «,».». ecd,
FeUowship to grieve as they reach th ^
::L"x;Ev:L°r;.d»d,i.e_h,
will be crawling with ores.
Sequence Ji
This twelve-minute diimilrtlaraSut C
this case Lothlorien. The having survived the
objective^to “..e scene as’oppased to the whole
test, giving him adwe P tiairsitron from second to
of the sequence. The sequence also ,, *e “end” of the
,M,d .c, o, « .h. .e-T ' WTs™ . .ranrform-
Elm. As discussed previously, the q but it does
Ing, culminating ]";;fp;Sowship, and the audience, a chance
offer surviving members of th journey. Further, be¬
ta rest and catch their breath before of the
cause Gandalf, whose sequence serves to focus the story
T same minimal setup as the others, with.
othlonen identified as the destination, but its distance in miles and
days of trawl, what the place is supposed to be like, and what the likeli-
mod of their success m getting there are not revealed. It must be
sliessed again that these are not idle questions. For a viewer whose
hopes and fears are tied into the prospects of success or failure of the
expedition, such information is key to making an assessment as to the
progress. Lothlorien has never before been mentioned. Does the deci
Sion to go there represent a new direction? Does it mean that they’re
m^ng progress or losing ground? What is to be expected when they
£ WRivendell or a potential source of danger
the Mines of Mona? Is it a ,umping-off point for the journey to
Mordor or far from it? Knowing these things will enhance an audience’s
sense of hope and fear; ignorance of them reinforces the sense of travel-
ogue--we go along for the ride, and have little sense of anticipation be¬
yond the expectation of a change in scenery at regular intervals
After traveling through some open fields, the Fellowship enters some
woods, and here a late attempt at preparation is made; Gimli warning
rodo and Sam about some sorceress who lives m the woods. It’s mini¬
mally effective both logicaUy (wouldn’t this issue have come up long
efore.) and from a storytelling viewpoint (it’s too late to create much
o a sense of anticipation). Gimli goes on to say he will not fall under
her spe 1, and he is very observant; it is a brief use of preparation by
on rast, for as soon as he offers this reassurance, the Fellowship finds
Itself surrounded by elves wielding bows and arrows.
Aragorn asks the leader of these elves, Haldir, for protection; Gimli
js the woods are too dangerous and that they should go back;
Haldir tells them they ve entered the realm of the “Lady of the Wood ”
who IS waiting—a dialogue hook into the next scene.
Frodo and the others proceed up the stairways of some large trees
and find themselves standing before Galadriei. presumably the Lady of
the Wood. She recapitulates their situation-the quest stands on the
edge of a knife, and may fail, to the ruin of all. She makes withering eve
contact with a very nervous Boromir, then urges them to rest-a dia-
ogue hook into the next scene, which finds the Fellowship lounging
about at the foot of the trees. uuugmg
Two recapitulation scenes follow that set up dangling causes for the
mbsequent sequence. In the first, Boromir confides in Aragorn his
doubts about restoring Condor to its former glory now that his father
aihng. In the second, Frodo is silently summoned into the presence
The Feliowship of the Ring: The Shotgun Approach
221
of Galadriei, who recounts what is at stake in the Fellowship’s quest and
warns him that one member of the Fellowship will try to get the ring;
this is a powerful dangling cause that sets up a major question in the
following sequence: will Boromir seize the ring? Frodo then offers the
ring to Galadriei, who confesses but rejects it. Frodo confesses his fear
about carrying on; she tells him that even the smallest person can
change the course of the future—another dangling cause, which ends
the sequence.
Sequence J: Assault of the Uruk-hai
The second-to-last sequence of the him is also the second longest, at
h^^enty-one minutes, and is centered on the question of whether or not
the Fellowship can overcome the attack of Saruman s orc/gohhn sol¬
diers {Uruk-hdi). This dramatic question is what carries the biillc of the
third act of the picture.
The sequence begins with a cutaway to Saruman^ who gives his
troops a pep talk—"'Cut them down; do not stop till they are found; do
not know pain, do not know fear, you will taste man-flesh!'' These dan¬
gling causes, and the orders he gives to Lurtz, the lead Uruk-hai—‘'One
of the halflings carries something of value—bring them alive and un¬
spoiled; kill the others’’—essentially complete the setup, or '‘first act,”
of the sequence. The sur^nving members of the Fellowship need to con¬
tinue their journey; the chief obstacle will be Saruman’s Urnk-hai, op¬
erating under cruel orders.
The film crosscuts between the Fellowship setting out on canoes and
the quick march of the Uiiik-hai. The destination of Frodo and his
companions is even more vague for this sequence than for any of the
others; they are simply moving onward, presumably toward Mordor.
No milestones are offered and therefore there is no way to gauge their
progress. There is also no way to know bow close or far the Uruk-hai
are from the Fellowship, infoima'tion that would certainly help to en¬
hance the audience’s sense of hope or fear.
Frodo and his companions eventually beach their boats, and at a
campsite, Aragorn gives the first sense of a plan; they will move across
the lake at nightfall and approach Mordor from the north on foot.
Gimli objects to the route, recounting some forbidding terrain on the
w^ay; Aragorn insists it is the plan, At this point Legolas shares with Ara¬
gorn a sense of impending danger and urges them to continue on im-
222
SCREENWRITING
mediately. Shortly afterward, Frodo and Boromir are discovered
missing.
The two are deeper into the woods, where Boromir tries to take the
ring from Frodo—picking up the dangling cause of GaladrieFs warning.
Frodo manages to escape from Boromir, and finds himself in the pres¬
ence of Aragorn. Frodo tells him to look after the others, telegraphing
the notion that Frodo will go on alone.
At this point Aragorn notices that Frodo’s sword is glowing blue—
signaling the presence of ores. It is the second payoff of this prop; un¬
fortunately in both payoffs (here and in the Mines of Moria) the
characters notice the glow before the audience has a chance to see it. If
the order had been reversed, the ironic tension created—the audience
realizing ores are near before the characters do—would have been very
intense.
Frodo flees and Aragorn is left to take on the army of Uruk-hai alone
until the other members of the Fellowship arrive to help. Boromir is
killed in the battle, closing off the dangling cause of his vow to restore
glory to Condor, though Aragorn promises to carry on in that regard,
initiating another cause that dangles beyond the end of the film. Ara¬
gorn, Gimli, and Legolas manage to prevail, but not before Merry and
Pippin are hauled off to Isengard.
Sequence K: Frodo and Sam Go On Alone
The final sequence finds Frodo at water's edge. He recalls Gandalf's
words about doing the best he can with what is given to him, and, thus
fortified, gets into one of the boats. Sam arrives soon after and swims
out to join him. After a few moments of suspense in which it seems Sam
might drown, Frodo pulls him. Sam tells him he never means to leave
Frodo, another cause that will dangle beyond the end of the picture.
The two embrace and journey on together.
The movie switches to Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli, who decide to
rescue Merry and Pippin. Aragorn leads them back into the woods with
the words “Let's hunt some ore,” and yet another dangling cause is ini¬
tiated, to be picked up in the sequel.
At the end of the picture, Frodo and Sam look out at their ultimate
destination—Mordor—and they both initiate the final dangling causes
of the picture: Frodo hoping the others find a safer route, and doubting
they’ll ever see them again, and Sam suggesting they may yet.
miOWSHff OF THE RING
Sequence Breakdown
Descriptloa
Running
Length Time
Opening Narration
The long-expected parps Bilbo disappears; Gandalf 19:26
confronts him about the ring; he goes away; Gandalf
tells Frodo to keep the ring secret and safe. Unifying^
Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Promgornst: Bilbo. Objective:
To make a memorable exit.
Gandalf researches at library and returns; Black Riders 9:45
set out; Gaudalf sends Frodo and Sam on a journey to
Bree. U^i/yfng DramaticTensiom Protagonist:
Gandalf. Objective: To kani about the ring.
ACT 11 . . >
(Main tension: WiU Frodo convey the ring to safety^
Gandalf is betrayed bySaruman; Frodo and Sam are 12:46
joined by Meriy and Pippin^ The company nariov-dy
escapes the Black Riders and makes it to Bree. Unifying
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Frodo, Objective:
To get to Bree.
Frodo and Liends are befriended by Stnder at the 7:53
Prancing Pony. The Black Riders narrowly miss them.
Vmfyitig Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Stnder.
Objective: To help the hobbits.
Strider leads the hobbits on the journey to Rivendell; 16:19
Saruman puts the hurt on Gandalf. Frodo is wounded
by one of the Black Riders, After Slriderhghts them all
off, the elf Anven conveys him safely to Rivendell-
Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension. ProtagorisP. Strider.
Objective: To guide the hobbits to Rlvendell.
Frodo recovers iti RivendeLl; Gandalf andElrond debate 21:5o
what to do about the ring; Bofoniir, Legolas and Girnk
are introduced; the Fellowship of the Ring is established
at the Council of Elrond. Unifying Aspect Location
(Rivendell) and Action (the creation of the Fellowship^
First Culmincition: TheformbagofthefeHov^ship (56%).
Gandalf leads the Eellow'ship on the first leg of its 7;4C
journey, which takes them to the Pass of Caradhras,
which Saruman’s magre renders impassable- Umfyrng
Aspect. Dramatic Tension. Frotcigonht. Gandaif.
224
SCREENWRITING
Objective: To lead the Fellowship through the Pass of
Caradhras.
H The Fellowship enters the Mines of Moria and after 18:43 2:01:41
battling a tentaded monster. They discover that the (71%)
dwarves within have been massacred. They battle ores
and a cave troll, and Frodo is run through by a lance,
only to be saved by a magical chain mail. Unifying
Aspect Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Gandalf.
Objective: To lead the Fellowship through the Mines of
Moria.
[ The Fellowship flees from the Balrog, escapes across the 9:19 2:11:00
Bridge of Kazad-dum. Gandalf confronts the Balrog (76%)
there and tumbles into the chasm with him. Unijying
Aspect: Dramatic Tension. Protagonist Gandalf.
Objective: Tb lead the Fellowship to and across the
Bridge of Kazad-dum.
J The Fellowship travels to Lothlorien. Once there, they 12:11 2:23:1 i
rest while the elf Galadnel warns Frodo about the (84%)
danger that Boromir poses to the Fellowship. Unifying
Aspect Location (Lothlorien).
Second Culmination: The arrival at Lothlorien.
ACT III
K The Fellowship sets off by boat but is overtaken by 21:01 2:44:12
Saruman’s Uruk-hai. Boromir tries to get ring but (96%)
Frodo overcomes him, The battle with ores ensues, in
which Boromir dies. Frodo escapes while Merry and
Pippin are taken prisoner. Unifying Aspect Dramatic
Tension. Protagonist Frodo. Objective: To carry on the
quest despite trouble with Boromir and the Uruk-hai.
Frodo and Sam set out alone to Mordor, while Aragorn,
Legolas, and Gimli decide to go off and rescue Merry
and Pippin. Unifying Aspect Dramatic Tension.
Protagonist. Frodo. Objective: To set off for Mordor,
L
6:18
2:50:30
( 100 %)
Sources
Archer, William. Play-Making: A Manual of Craftsmanship. Boston:
Small, Maynard & Co., 191.2.
Aristotle, Poetics. ,
Bordwell, David, Janet Staiger, and Kristin Thompson. The f
Hollywood Cinema: Film Styk and Mode of Produaion to 1960. New
York-Columbia Unirersity Press, 1985.
Bordwell, David. Narmhoti In The Fiction Fihi. Madison: Untversity of
Wisconsin Press, 1985.
Clark, Barrett H. European Theories of the Drama. New York, N .
Crown Publishers, 1970.
Elsaesser, Thomas, and Warren Buckland. Srudytng Contemporary
American Film. New York: Oxford UniversiY Press Inc., 200 .
Field, Syd. Screenplay: The Foundations of Screenwritmg. New York; Dell,
1994
Forstei, E. M. Aspects oftheNovel Hew York, NY: Harcourt Brace, 1927.
Howard, David, and Edward Mabley. The Tools of ScreenwnUng. New
York, NY; St. Martin’s Press. 1996.
Rimmon-Kenan. Shlonrith, Harrative Ftctwn: Contemporary Poetics.
London: RoutledgeM9S3* , .r j u j-
Thompson, Knstm, Smryubs /» the Nee. mllyeeood:
Ctom; Nmative Teeknique. Cambndge, Hamid UnreetsitrPress,
1999.
— 225 —