FONTE: http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/interview.bl.html
URL: http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/interview.bl.html

Kubrick on Barry Lyndon
An interview with Michel Ciment
Michel Ciment: You have given almost no interviews on Barry Lyndon.
Does this decision relate to this film particularly, or is it because you
are reluctant to speak about your work?
Stanley Kubrick: I suppose my excuse is that the picture was ready
only a few weeks before it opened and I really had no time to do any
interviews. But if I'm to be completely honest, it's probably due more to
the fact that I don't like doing interviews. There is always the problem
of being misquoted or, what's even worse, of being quoted exactly, and
having to see what you've said in print. Then there are the mandatory --
"How did you get along with actor X, Y or Z?" -- "Who really thought of
good idea A, B or C?" I think Nabokov may have had the right approach to
interviews. He would only agree to write down the answers and then send
them on to the interviewer who would then write the questions.
Do you feel that Barry Lyndon is a more secret film, more difficult
to talk about?
Not really. I've always found it difficult to talk about any of my films.
What I generally manage to do is to discuss the background information
connected with the story, or perhaps some of the interesting facts which
might be associated with it. This approach often allows me to avoid the
"What does it mean? Why did you do it?" questions. For example, with
Dr. Strangelove I could talk about the spectrum of bizarre ideas
connected with the possibilities of accidental or unintentional warfare.
2001: A Space Odyssey allowed speculation about ultra-intelligent
computers, life in the universe, and a whole range of science-fiction
ideas. A Clockwork Orange involved law and order, criminal
violence, authority versus freedom, etc. With Barry Lyndon you
haven't got these topical issues to talk around, so I suppose that does
make it a bit more difficult.
Your last three films were set in the future. What led you to make an
historical film?
I can't honestly say what led me to make any of my films. The best I can
do is to say I just fell in love with the stories. Going beyond that is a
bit like trying to explain why you fell in love with your wife: she's
intelligent, has brown eyes, a good figure. Have you really said anything?
Since I am currently going through the process of trying to decide what
film to make next, I realize just how uncontrollable is the business of
finding a story, and how much it depends on chance and spontaneous
reaction. You can say a lot of "architectural" things about what a film
story should have: a strong plot, interesting characters, possibilities
for cinematic development, good opportunities for the actors to display
emotion, and the presentation of its thematic ideas truthfully and
intelligently. But, of course, that still doesn't really explain why you
finally chose something, nor does it lead you to a story. You can only say
that you probably wouldn't choose a story that doesn't have most of those
qualities.
Since you are completely free in your choice of story material, how
did you come to pick up a book by Thackeray, almost forgotten and hardly
republished since the nineteenth century?
I have had a complete set of Thackeray sitting on my bookshelf at home for
years, and I had to read several of his novels before reading Barry
Lyndon. At one time, Vanity Fair interested me as a possible
film but, in the end, I decided the story could not be successfully
compressed into the relatively short time-span of a feature film. This
problem of length, by the way, is now wonderfully accommodated for by the
television miniseries which, with its ten- to twelve-hour length, pressed
on consecutive nights, has created a completely different dramatic form.
Anyway, as soon as I read Barry Lyndon I became very excited about
it. I loved the story and the characters, and it seemed possible to make
the transition from novel to film without destroying it in the process. It
also offered the opportunity to do one of the things that movies can do
better than any other art form, and that is to present historical subject
matter. Description is not one of the things that novels do best but it is
something that movies do effortlessly, at least with respect to the effort
required of the audience. This is equally true for science-fiction and
fantasy, which offer visual challenges and possibilities you don't find in
contemporary stories.
How did you come to adopt a third-person commentary instead of the
first-person narrative which is found in the book?
I believe Thackeray used Redmond Barry to tell his own story in a
deliberately distorted way because it made it more interesting. Instead of
the omniscient author, Thackeray used the imperfect observer, or perhaps
it would be more accurate to say the dishonest observer, thus allowing the
reader to judge for himself, with little difficulty, the probable truth in
Redmond Barry's view of his life. This technique worked extremely well in
the novel but, of course, in a film you have objective reality in front of
you all of the time, so the effect of Thackeray's first-person
story-teller could not be repeated on the screen. It might have worked as
comedy by the juxtaposition of Barry's version of the truth with the
reality on the screen, but I don't think that Barry Lyndon should
have been done as a comedy.
You didn't think of having no commentary?
There is too much story to tell. A voice-over spares you the cumbersome
business of telling the necessary facts of the story through expositional
dialogue scenes which can become very tiresome and frequently
unconvincing: "Curse the blasted storm that's wrecked our blessed ship!"
Voice-over, on the other hand, is a perfectly legitimate and economical
way of conveying story information which does not need dramatic weight and
which would otherwise be too bulky to dramatize.
But you use it in other way -- to cool down the emotion of a scene,
and to anticipate the story. For instance, just after the meeting with the
German peasant girl -- a very moving scene -- the voice-over compares her
to a town having been often conquered by siege.
In the scene that you're referring to, the voice-over works as an ironic
counterpoint to what you see portrayed by the actors on the screen. This
is only a minor sequence in the story and has to be presented with
economy. Barry is tender and romantic with the girl but all he really
wants is to get her into bed. The girl is lonely and Barry is attractive
and attentive. If you think about it, it isn't likely that he is the only
soldier she has brought home while her husband has been away to the wars.
You could have had Barry give signals to the audience, through his
performance, indicating that he is really insincere and opportunistic, but
this would be unreal. When we try to deceive we are as convincing as we
can be, aren't we?
The film's commentary also serves another purpose, but this time in much
the same manner it did in the novel. The story has many twists and turns,
and Thackeray uses Barry to give you hints in advance of most of the
important plot developments, thus lessening the risk of their seeming
contrived.
When he is going to meet the Chevalier Balibari, the commentary
anticipates the emotions we are about to see, thus possibly lessening
their effect.
Barry Lyndon is a story which does not depend upon surprise. What
is important is not what is going to happen, but how it will
happen. I think Thackeray trades off the advantage of surprise to gain a
greater sense of inevitability and a better integration of what might
otherwise seem melodramatic or contrived. In the scene you refer to where
Barry meets the Chevalier, the film's voice-over establishes the necessary
groundwork for the important new relationship which is rapidly to develop
between the two men. By talking about Barry's loneliness being so far from
home, his sense of isolation as an exile, and his joy at meeting a fellow
countryman in a foreign land, the commentary prepares the way for the
scenes which are quickly to follow showing his close attachment to the
Chevalier. Another place in the story where I think this technique works
particularly well is where we are told that Barry's young son, Bryan, is
going to die at the same time we watch the two of them playing happily
together. In this case, I think the commentary creates the same dramatic
effect as, for example, the knowledge that the Titanic is doomed
while you watch the carefree scenes of preparation and departure. These
early scenes would be inexplicably dull if you didn't know about the
ship's appointment with the iceberg. Being told in advance of the
impending disaster gives away surprise but creates suspense.
There is very little introspection in the film. Barry is open about
his feelings at the beginning of the film, but then he becomes less so.
At the beginning of the story, Barry has more people around him to whom he
can express his feelings. As the story progresses, and particularly after
his marriage, he becomes more and more isolated. There is finally no one
who loves him, or with whom he can talk freely, with the possible
exception of his young son, who is too young to be of much help. At the
same time I don't think that the lack of introspective dialogue scenes are
any loss to the story. Barry's feelings are there to be seen as he reacts
to the increasingly difficult circumstances of his life. I think this is
equally true for the other characters in the story. In any event, scenes
of people talking about themselves are often very dull.
In contrast to films which are preoccupied with analyzing the
psychology of the characters, yours tend to maintain a mystery around
them. Reverend Runt, for instance, is a very opaque person. You don't know
exactly what his motivations are.
But you know a lot about Reverend Runt, certainly all that is necessary.
He dislikes Barry. He is secretly in love with Lady Lyndon, in his own
prim, repressed, little way. His little smile of triumph, in the scene in
the coach, near the end of the film, tells you all you need to know
regarding the way he feels about Barry's misfortune, and the way things
have worked out. You certainly don't have the time in a film to develop
the motivations of minor characters.
Lady Lyndon is even more opaque.
Thackeray doesn't tell you a great deal about her in the novel. I found
that very strange. He doesn't give you a lot to go on. There are, in fact,
very few dialogue scenes with her in the book. Perhaps he meant her to be
something of a mystery. But the film gives you a sufficient understanding
of her anyway.
You made important changes in your adaptation, such as the invention
of the last duel, and the ending itself.
Yes, I did, but I was satisfied that they were consistent with the spirit
of the novel and brought the story to about the same place the novel did,
but in less time. In the book, Barry is pensioned off by Lady Lyndon. Lord
Bullingdon, having been believed dead, returns from America. He finds
Barry and gives him a beating. Barry, tended by his mother, subsequently
dies in prison, a drunk. This, and everything that went along with it in
the novel to make it credible would have taken too much time on the
screen. In the film, Bullingdon gets his revenge and Barry is totally
defeated, destined, one can assume, for a fate not unlike that which
awaited him in the novel.
And the scene of the two homosexuals in the lake was not in the book
either.
The problem here was how to get Barry out of the British Army. The section
of the book dealing with this is also fairly lengthy and complicated.
The function of the scene between the two gay officers was to provide a
simpler way for Barry to escape. Again, it leads to the same end result as
the novel but by a different route. Barry steals the papers and uniform of
a British officer which allow him to make his way to freedom. Since the
scene is purely expositional, the comic situation helps to mask your
intentions.
Were you aware of the multiple echoes that are found in the film:
flogging in the army, flogging at home, the duels, etc., and the narrative
structure resembling that of A Clockwork Orange? Does this geometrical
pattern attract you?
The narrative symmetry arose primarily out of the needs of telling the
story rather than as part of a conscious design. The artistic process you
go through in making a film is as much a matter of discovery as it is the
execution of a plan. Your first responsibility in writing a screenplay is
to pay the closest possible attention to the author's ideas and make sure
you really understand what he has written and why he has
written it. I know this sounds pretty obvious but you'd be surprised how
often this is not done. There is a tendency for the screenplay writer to
be "creative" too quickly. The next thing is to make sure that the story
survives the selection and compression which has to occur in order to tell
it in a maximum of three hours, and preferably two. This phase usually
seals the fate of most major novels, which really need the large canvas
upon which they are presented.
In the first part of A Clockwork Orange, we were against Alex. In
the second part, we were on his side. In this film, the
attraction/repulsion feeling towards Barry is present throughout.
Thackeray referred to it as "a novel without a hero". Barry is naive and
uneducated. He is driven by a relentless ambition for wealth and social
position. This proves to be an unfortunate combination of qualities which
eventually lead to great misfortune and unhappiness for himself and those
around him. Your feelings about Barry are mixed but he has charm and
courage, and it is impossible not to like him despite his vanity, his
insensitivity and his weaknesses. He is a very real character who is
neither a conventional hero nor a conventional villain.
The feeling that we have at the end is one of utter waste.
Perhaps more a sense of tragedy, and because of this the story can
assimilate the twists and turns of the plot without becoming melodrama.
Melodrama uses all the problems of the world, and the difficulties and
disasters which befall the characters, to demonstrate that the world is,
after all, a benevolent and just place.
The last sentence which says that all the characters are now equal can
be taken as a nihilistic or religious statement. From your films, one has
the feeling that you are a nihilist who would like to believe.
I think you'll find that it is merely an ironic postscript taken from the
novel. Its meaning seems quite clear to me and, as far as I'm concerned,
it has nothing to do with nihilism or religion.
One has the feeling in your films that the world is in a constant
state of war. The apes are fighting in 2001. There is fighting, too, in
Paths Of Glory, and Dr. Strangelove. In Barry Lyndon, you have a war
in the first part, and then in the second part we find the home is a
battleground, too.
Drama is conflict, and violent conflict does not find its exclusive domain
in my films. Nor is it uncommon for a film to be built around a situation
where violent conflict is the driving force. With respect to Barry
Lyndon, after his successful struggle to achieve wealth and social
position, Barry proves to be badly unsuited to this role. He has clawed
his way into a gilded cage, and once inside his life goes really bad. The
violent conflicts which subsequently arise come inevitably as a result of
the characters and their relationships. Barry's early conflicts carry him
forth into life and they bring him adventure and happiness, but those in
later life lead only to pain and eventually to tragedy.
In many ways, the film reminds us of silent movies. I am thinking
particularly of the seduction of Lady Lyndon by Barry at the gambling
table.
That's good. I think that silent films got a lot more things right than
talkies. Barry and Lady Lyndon sit at the gaming table and exchange
lingering looks. They do not say a word. Lady Lyndon goes out on the
balcony for some air. Barry follows her outside. They gaze longingly into
each other's eyes and kiss. Still not a word is spoken. It's very
romantic, but at the same time, I think it suggests the empty attraction
they have for each other that is to disappear as quickly as it arose. It
sets the stage for everything that is to follow in their relationship. The
actors, the images and the Schubert worked well together, I think.
Did you have Schubert's Trio in mind while preparing and shooting this
particular scene?
No, I decided on it while we were editing. Initially, I thought it was
right to use only eighteenth-century music. But sometimes you can make
ground-rules for yourself which prove unnecessary and counter-productive.
I think I must have listened to every LP you can buy of eighteenth-century
music. One of the problems which soon became apparent is that there are no
tragic love-themes in eighteenth-century music. So eventually I decided to
use Schubert's Trio in E Flat, Opus 100, written in 1828. It's a
magnificent piece of music and it has just the right restrained balance
between the tragic and the romantic without getting into the headier stuff
of later Romanticism.
You also cheated in another way by having Leonard Rosenman orchestrate
Handel's Sarabande in a more dramatic style than you would find in
eighteenth-century composition.
This arose from another problem about eighteenth-century music -- it isn't
very dramatic, either. I first came across the Handel theme played on a
guitar and, strangely enough, it made me think of Ennio Morricone. I think
it worked very well in the film, and the very simple orchestration kept it
from sounding out of place.
It also accompanies the last duel -- not present in the novel -- which
is one of the most striking scenes in the film and is set in a dovecote.
The setting was a tithe barn which also happened to have a lot of pigeons
resting in the rafters. We've seen many duels before in films, and I
wanted to find a different and interesting way to present the scene. The
sound of the pigeons added something to this, and, if it were a comedy, we
could have had further evidence of the pigeons. Anyway, you tend to expect
movie duels to be fought outdoors, possibly in a misty grove of trees at
dawn. I thought the idea of placing the duel in a barn gave it an
interesting difference. This idea came quite by accident when one of the
location scouts returned with some photographs of the barn. I think it was
Joyce who observed that accidents are the portals to discovery. Well,
that's certainly true in making films. And perhaps in much the same way,
there is an aspect of film-making which can be compared to a sporting
contest. You can start with a game plan but depending on where the ball
bounces and where the other side happens to be, opportunities and problems
arise which can only be effectively dealt with at that very moment.
In 2001: A Space Odyssey, for example, there seemed no clever way
for HAL to learn that the two astronauts distrusted him and were planning
to disconnect his brain. It would have been irritatingly careless of them
to talk aloud, knowing that HAL would hear and understand them. Then the
perfect solution presented itself from the actual phsical layout of the
space pod in the pod bay. The two men went into the pod and turned off
every switch to make them safe from HAL's microphones. They sat in the pod
facing each other and in the center of the shot, visible through the
sound-proof glass port, you could plainly see the red glow of HAL's
bug-eye lens, some fifteen feet away. What the conspirators didn't think
of was that HAL would be able to read their lips.
Did you find it more constricting, less free, making an historical
film where we all have precise conceptions of a period? Was it more of a
challenge?
No, because at least you know what everything looked like. In 2001: A
Space Odyssey everything had to be designed. But neither type of film
is easy to do. In historical and futuristic films, there is an inverse
relationship between the ease the audience has taking in at a glance the
sets, costumes and decor, and the film-maker's problems in creating it.
When everything you see has to be designed and constructed, you greatly
increase the cost of the film, add tremendously to all the normal problems
of film-making, making it virtually impossible to have the flexibility of
last-minute changes which you can manage in a contemporary film.
You are well-known for the thoroughness with which you accumulate
information and do research when you work on a project. Is it for you the
thrill of being a reporter or a detective?
I suppose you could say it is a bit like being a detective. On
Barry Lyndon, I accumulated a very large picture file of drawings
and paintings taken from art books. These pictures served as the reference
for everything we needed to make -- clothes, furniture, hand props,
architecture, vehicles, etc. Unfortunately, the pictures would have been
too awkward to use while they were still in the books, and I'm afraid we
finally had very guiltily to tear up a lot of beautiful art books. They
were all, fortunately, still in print which made it seem a little less
sinful. Good research is an absolute necessity and I enjoy doing it. You
have an important reason to study a subject in much greater depth than you
would ever have done otherwise, and then you have the satisfaction of
putting the knowledge to immediate good use. The designs for the clothes
were all copied from drawings and paintings of the period. None of them
were designed in the normal sense. This is the best way, in my opinion, to
make historical costumes. It doesn't seem sensible to have a designer
interpret -- say -- the eighteenth century, using the same picture sources
from which you could faithfully copy the clothes. Neither is there much
point sketching the costumes again when they are already beautifully
represented in the paintings and drawings of the period. What is very
important is to get some actual clothes of the period to learn how they
were originally made. To get them to look right, you really have to make
them the same way. Consider also the problem of taste in designing
clothes, even for today. Only a handful of designers seem to have a sense
of what is striking and beautiful. How can a designer, however brilliant,
have a feeling for the clothes of another period which is equal to that of
the people and the designers of the period itself, as recorded in their
pictures? I spent a year preparing Barry Lyndon before the shooting
began and I think this time was very well spent. The starting point and
sine qua non of any historical or futuristic story is to make you believe
what you see.
The danger in an historical film is that you lose yourself in details,
and become decorative.
The danger connected with any multi-faceted problem is that you might pay
too much attention to some of the problems to the detriment of others, but
I am very conscious of this and I make sure I don't do that.
Why do you prefer natural lighting?
Because it's the way we see things. I have always tried to light my films
to simulate natural light; in the daytime using the windows actually to
light the set, and in night scenes the practical lights you see in the
set. This approach has its problems when you can use bright electric light
sources, but when candelabras and oil lamps are the brightest light
sources which can be in the set, the difficulties are vastly increased.
Prior to Barry Lyndon, the problem has never been properly solved.
Even if the director and cameraman had the desire to light with practical
light sources, the film and the lenses were not fast enough to get an
exposure. A 35mm movie camera shutter exposes at about 1/50 of a second,
and a useable exposure was only possible with a lens at least 100% faster
than any which had ever been used on a movie camera. Fortunately, I found
just such a lens, one of a group of ten which Zeiss had specially
manufactured for NASA satellite photography. The lens had a speed of fO.7,
and it was 100% faster than the fastest movie lens. A lot of work still
had to be done to it and to the camera to make it useable. For one thing,
the rear element of the lens had to be 2.5mm away from the film plane,
requiring special modification to the rotating camera shutter. But with
this lens it was now possible to shoot in light conditions so dim that it
was difficult to read. For the day interior scenes, we used either the
real daylight from the windows, or simulated daylight by banking lights
outside the windows and diffusing them with tracing paper taped on the
glass. In addition to the very beautiful lighting you can achieve this
way, it is also a very practical way to work. You don't have to worry
about shooting into your lighting equipment. All your lighting is outside
the window behind tracing paper, and if you shoot towwards the window you
get a very beautiful and realistic flare effect.
How did you decide on Ryan O'Neal?
He was the best actor for the part. He looked right and I was confident
that he possessed much greater acting ability than he had been allowed to
show in many of the films he had previously done. In retrospect, I think
my confidence in him was fully justified by his performance, and I still
can't think of anyone who would have been better for the part. The
personal qualities of an actor, as they relate to the role, are almost as
important as his ability, and other actors, say, like Al Pacino, Jack
Nicholson or Dustin Hoffman, just to name a few who are great actors,
would nevertheless have been wrong to play Barry Lyndon. I liked Ryan and
we got along very well together. In this regard the only difficulties I
have ever had with actors happened when their acting technique wasn't good
enough to do something you asked of them. One way an actor deals with this
difficulty is to invent a lot of excuses that have nothing to do with the
real problem. This was very well represented in Truuffaut's Day For
Night when Valentina Cortese, the star of the film within the film,
hadn't bothered to learn her lines and claimed her dialogue fluffs were
due to the confusion created by the script girl playing a bit part in the
scene.
How do you explain some of the misunderstandings about the film by the
American press and the English press?
The American press was predominantly enthusiastic about the film, and
Time magazine ran a cover story about it. The international press
was even more enthusiastic. It is true that the English press was badly
split. But from the very beginning, all of my films have divided the
critics. Some have thought them wonderful, and others have found very
little good to say. But subsequent critical opinion has always resulted in
a very remarkable shift to the favorable. In one instance, the same critic
who originally rapped the film has several years later put it on an
all-time best list. But, of course, the lasting and ultimately most
important reputation of a film is not based on reviews, but on what, if
anything, people say about it over the years, and on how much affection
for it they have.
You are an innovator, but at the same time you are very conscious of
tradition.
I try to be, anyway. I think that one of the problems with
twentieth-century art is its preoccupation with subjectivity and
originality at the expense of everything else. This has been especially
true in painting and music. Though initially stimulating, this soon
impeded the full development of any particular style, and rewarded
uninteresting and sterile originality. At the same time, it is very sad to
say, films have had the opposite problem -- they have consistently tried
to formalize and repeat success, and they have clung to a form and style
introduced in their infancy. The sure thing is what everone wants,
and originality is not a nice word in this context. This is true
despite the repeated example that nothing is as dangerous as a sure thing.
You have abandoned original film music in your last three films.
Exclude a pop music score from what I am about to say. However good our
best film composers may be, they are not a Beethoven, a Mozart or a
Brahms. Why use music which is less good when there is such a multitude of
great orchestral music available from the past and from our own time? When
you're editing a film, it's very helpful to be able to try out different
pieces of music to see how they work with the scene. This is not at all an
uncommon practice. Well, with a little more care and thought, these
temporary music tracks can become the final score. When I had
completed the editing of 2001: A Space Odyssey, I had laid in
temporary music tracks for almost all of the music which was
eventually used in the film. Then, in the normal way, I engaged the
services of a distinguished film composer to write the score. Although he
and I went over the picture very carefully, and he listened to these
temporary tracks (Strauss, Ligeti, Khatchaturian) and agreed that
they worked fine and would serve as a guide to the musical objectives of
each sequence he, nevertheless, wrote and recorded a score which could not
have been more alien to the music we had listened to, and much more
serious than that, a score which, in my opinion, was completely inadequate
for the film. With the premiere looming up, I had no time left even to
think about another score being written, and had I not been able to use
the music I had already selected for the temporary tracks I don't
know what I would have done. The composer's agent phoned Robert O'Brien,
the then head of MGM, to warn him that if I didn't use his client's score
the film would not make its premiere date. But in that instance, as in all
others, O'Brien trusted my judgment. He is a wonderful man, and one of the
very few film bosses able to inspire genuine loyalty and affection from
his film-makers.
Why did you choose to have only one flashback in the film: the child
falling from the horse?
I didn't want to spend the time which would have been required to show the
entire story action of young Bryan sneaking away from the house, taking
the horse, falling, being found, etc. Nor did I want to learn about the
accident solely through the dialogue scene in which the farm workers,
carrying the injured boy, tell Barry. Putting the flashback fragment in
the middle of the dialogue scene seemed to be the right thing to do.
Are your camera movements planned before?
Very rarely. I think there is virtually no point putting camera
instructions into a screenplay, and only if some really important camera
idea occurs to me, do I write it down. When you rehearse a scene, it is
usually best not to think about the camera at all. If you do, I have found
that it invariably interferes with the fullest exploration of the ideas of
the scene. When, at last, something happens which you know is worth
filming, that is the time to decide how to shoot it. It is almost
but not quite true to say that when something really exciting and
worthwhile is happening, it doesn't matter how you shoot it. In any event,
it never takes me long to decide on set-ups, lighting or camera movements.
The visual part of film making has always come easiest to me, and that is
why I am careful to subordinate it to the story and the performances.
Do you like writing alone or would you like to work with a script
writer?
I enjoy working with someone I find stimulating. One of the most fruitful
and enjoyable collaborations I have had was with Arthur C. Clarke in
writing the story of 2001: A Space Odyssey. One of the paradoxes of
movie writing is that, with a few notable exceptions, writers who can
really write are not interested in working on film scripts. They quite
correctly regard their important work as being done for publication. I
wrote the screenplay for Barry Lyndon alone. The first
draft took three or four months but, as with all my films, the subsequent
writing process never really stopped. What you have written and is yet
unfilmed is inevitably affected by what has been filmed. New problems of
content or dramatic weight reveal themselves. Rehearsing a scene can also
cause script changes. However carefully you think about a scene, and
however clearly you believe you have visualized it, it's never the same
when you finally see it played. Sometimes a totally new idea comes up out
of the blue, during a rehearsal, or even during actual shooting, which is
simply too good to ignore. This can necessitate the new scene being worked
out with the actors right then and there. As long as the actors know the
objectives of the scene, and understand their characters, this is less
difficult and much quicker to do than you might imagine.
Return to Subdirectory